--- PAGE 1 ---
Page | 1

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION/ANTI-HARASSMENT POLICY

Mission Statement

The City of Cleveland promotes a workplace that values and respects the dignity of
the individual and that is free of harassment and discrimination. Accordingly, the
City of Cleveland strictly prohibits and does not tolerate harassment and
discrimination based on sex, race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry,
ethnicity, age (40 or older), marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity or
expression, pregnancy, physical or mental disability, military status, including
past, current or prospective service in the uniformed services, genetic
information, and any other basis protected by federal, state, or local law
("Protected Status") This policy applies to all terms and conditions of employment,
including, but not limited to, training, promotion, discipline, compensation, benefits,
and termination of employment. The City expects all employees to always observe the
highest standards of professional conduct.

Prohibition against Retaliation:  The City of Cleveland also prohibits retaliation.  As a
result, no one will be subject to, and the City of Cleveland prohibits any form of
discipline, reprisal, intimidation, or retaliation for good faith reports, or complaints of
incidents of discrimination of any kind, pursuing any discrimination claim, or
cooperating in related investigations.

The City of Cleveland will respond promptly to complaints of harassment and
discrimination. Where it is determined that inappropriate behavior has occurred,
the City of Cleveland will act to eliminate the behavior and impose corrective action
up to and including termination of employment.

I. Statement of Policy

A. Employees shall not engage in discrimination based on Protected Status.
This applies to all conditions of employment, including, but not limited to,
hiring, firing, compensation, assignment, classification, transfer,
promotion, layoff, recall, job advertisements, recruitment, testing, use of
facilities, fringe benefits, pay, retirement plans, or other terms and
conditions of employment.

B. Employees shall not engage in harassment based on Protected Status.
Harassment may consist of unwelcome conduct, whether verbal, physical
or visual, that is based upon a person's protected status. The City will not

Page | 2

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
tolerate harassing conduct that affects tangible job benefits, that
interferes unreasonably with an individual's work performance, or that
creates an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment to a
reasonable person.

C. Employees shall not engage in retaliation. It is a violation of this policy to
engage in any form of discipline, reprisal, intimidation, or retaliation for
good faith reports, or complaints of incidents of discrimination of any
kind, pursuing any discrimination claim or cooperating in related
investigations.

If you are subjected to any conduct you believe violates this policy, you
must promptly speak to, write, or otherwise contact your immediate
supervisor and the Department of Human Resources (DHR). Complaints
should be detailed as possible, including the names of all individuals
involved and any witnesses.  Any manager of supervisor must also report
any observe or reported violations of this policy. The failure of any
manager or supervisor to report a possible policy violation, whether
reported or observed, may result in disciplinary action, up to and
including termination of employment.

D. There shall be no retaliation against an employee for making a good faith
report of discrimination, harassment, or other inappropriate behavior.  In
contrast, an employee who knowingly makes a false or bad faith
complaint may be subject to appropriate disciplinary action, up to and
including termination of employment.

E. All employees are expected to fully comply with any investigation, and
failure to do so is a violation of City policy.

F. The nature of the resolution will be determined based upon the individual
circumstances of the situation and the results of the internal
investigation. If it is determined that harassment or retaliation has
occurred, violators shall be subject to disciplinary action appropriate to
the circumstances, up to and including possible termination of
employment.

II. Representation

During an investigation, an employee may wish to have a representative

Page | 3

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
present. Should an employee seek representation, they must immediately
notify the investigator and ensure the attendance of the representative no
later than 24 hours before any investigatory interview or other action under
this policy, unless a different period is provided by any applicable collective
bargaining agreement.  Non bargaining unit employees may only use counsel
as a representative.

III. Confidentiality

All complaints and investigations are treated confidentially to the extent
possible and information is disclosed strictly on a need-to-know basis, but
confidentiality cannot be guaranteed. The identity of the complainant often
is revealed to the parties involved during the investigation, e.g. witnesses,
alleged harasser, Union representative, etc.

IV. Additional Information & Resources

To report violations or to ask questions about this policy, please contact:

Employee Relations Manager
Department of Human Resources
City Hall- 601 Lakeside Avenue, Room 121
Cleveland, Ohio 44114
(216) 664-2493

This policy has been issued under the authority of Matthew Cole, Director of
Human Resources:

__________________________________
Signature

Director of Human Resources
Title

March 25, 2024
 Date