--- PAGE 1 ---
Page | 1

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
DRUG & ALCOHOL TESTING POLICY
Mission Statement
The City of Cleveland has developed this Drug and Alcohol Testing Policy as part of
the City's continuing commitment to increasing and promoting safety in the
workplace, productivity, accident prevention, loss of control, commitment to
rehabilitation, and employee well-being. All persons employed by the City are
subject to this Policy.
Under this Policy, there is zero-tolerance for employees working while impaired
and for on-the-job possession, use, or selling of drugs or alcohol. The City of
Cleveland is a Drug-Free Workplace. All employees will be treated in a fair and
impartial manner and according to the terms set forth in their respective collective
bargaining agreements and/or this Policy. This Policy attempts to incorporate the
provisions of the respective collective bargaining agreements for those in
bargaining units. Should the provisions conflict with the Policy, the provisions in
the collective bargaining agreement shall prevail for those in the respective
bargaining unit.
This Policy will be maintained through a program designed to comply with the
provisions of the Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988, Omnibus Transportation
Employee Testing Act of 1991, and Department of Transportation ("DOT")
regulations.
I. Statement of Policy
A. City policy prohibits the distribution, possession, sale, or use of illegal
drugs, marijuana (THC), or alcohol during working hours at any City of
Cleveland worksite. Employees are prohibited from reporting to work or
working under the influence of alcohol or drugs; purchasing alcohol or
drugs for himself/herself or others while on duty; consuming or
possessing alcohol at any time while on duty or at a worksite; possession,
using, selling, purchasing, manufacturing, dispensing, or delivering any
illegal drug at any time and at any place; abusing any prescription drug;
and failing to report immediately to their supervisor any duty related
restrictions imposed as a result of prescription or over-the-counter
medications.
"Worksite" is defined as any office, building, property, motor vehicle, or
equipment, owned or operated by the City of Cleveland or any site at

Page | 2

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
which an employee is to perform work for the City. Although this policy is
intended to encourage voluntary rehabilitation, nothing in this policy
waives the City's rights to discipline an employee, or to initiate or
cooperate with law enforcement in prosecuting offenders.
B. All employees shall be required to be fit for work and free from the effects
of alcohol, illegal drugs, marijuana (THC), or the abuse or misuse of
prescribed drugs or over-the-counter drugs at all times during working
hours. Employees shall be responsible for following the instructions of the
prescribing physician or medical provider when taking prescription
medication. Employees shall be responsible for following the
manufacturer's instructions when taking over-the-counter medication.
Employees shall immediately report to their supervisor any duty-related
restrictions imposed as a result of prescription or over-the-counter
medication.

C. Employees in safety-sensitive positions subject to U.S. Department of
Transportation ("DOT") regulations shall be tested using a five (5) drug
panel. Drug classes include the following: Amphetamines (amphetamine
and methamphetamine), Cocaine Metabolites, Marijuana Metabolites,
MDA-Analogues (MDA, MDMA), Opiates (morphine, codeine), Opiates -
Semi-Synthetic (hydromorphone, hydrocodone), 6-Acetylmorphine,
Oxycodone (oxymorphone, oxycodone) and Phencyclidine. The initial test
levels and confirmatory test levels are as follows:
Dru
g EMIT Screen (ng/ml)GC/MC Confirmation
(ng/ml)
Amphetamines             500250
Cocaine                         150100
Marijuana (THC) 5015
Opiates                          20002000
Phencyclidine (PCP)    2525

Page | 3

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
D. All other employees in select and/or safety-sensitive positions as
described in Section IV shall be tested using the standard ten (10) drug
panel: Drug classes include the following: Amphetamines (amphetamine
and methamphetamine), Cocaine Metabolites, Marijuana Metabolites,
MDA-Analogues (MDA, MDMA, MDEA), Opiates (morphine, codeine),
Opiates - Semi-Synthetic (hydromorphone, hydrocodone), 6-
Acetylmorphine, Oxycodone (oxymorphone, oxycodone), Phencyclidine,
Barbiturates (amobarbital, butalbital, pentobarbital, phenobarbital,
secobarbital), Benzodiazepines (alprazolam metabolite, oxazepam,
flurazepam metabolite, lorzapam, nordiazepam, temazepam, triazolam
metabolite), Methadone, Methaqualone, and Propoxyphene. The initial
test levels and confirmatory test levels are as follows:

Dru
g EMIT Screen (ng/ml)GC/MC Confirmation
(ng/ml)
Amphetamines             500250
Cocaine                         150100
Marijuana (THC) 5015
Opioids                          20002000
Phencyclidine (PCP)    2525
Barbiturates                  300300
Benzodiazepines          300300
Methadone                    300300
Propoxyphene              300300

E. An employee testing at and above the levels of the drugs identified shall
be considered a positive test, and the employee is in violation of the
Policy.

F. Any employee testing at .03% or higher for alcohol shall be considered
positive as "under the influence" and is in violation of the Policy will be

Page | 4

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
relieved of duty without pay immediately and subject to positive test
results procedures.

G. Any employee testing at .02% shall be automatically relieved of duty for
the remainder of the work-day, unless the employee's collective
bargaining agreement indicates otherwise.

H. Drug paraphernalia and items used for substance abuse are prohibited
from the workplace at all times. Employees found with such paraphernalia
or items used for substance abuse on or in their possession are in
violation of the Policy.
II. Employee Awareness
The City provides employees with an opportunity to overcome drug and
alcohol related problems through an Employee Assistance Program ("EAP").
A. The Department of Human Resources ("DHR") shall be the office
responsible for maintaining and implementing this Policy.
B. The DHR will conduct an initial training when this Policy goes into effect
and is responsible to update procedures; communicate with employees,
management and supervisory personnel, and union leadership about the
Policy.
C. The DHR is the liaison with the City's testing facilities and is responsible
to maintain all records derived from implementing this Policy.
D. The DHR will be the resource for employees in all matters related to
assistance and access to referral services.
III. Testing Procedures
A. The City's testing facilities will follow relevant state, federal, or local
agencies testing procedures.
B. When testing for drugs, the employee is to provide a urine specimen at
the testing facility as prescribed by the regulations. If the specimen tests
positive for one of the drugs in the panel, the Medical Review Officer
(MRO) will contact the employee and the DHR.

Page | 5

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
1. Employees are subject to additional types of drug testing (i.e., hair,
blood, breath) if it is deemed necessary by the appointing authority
and/or the Department of Human Resources.
C. The usual method used for alcohol impairment is by breathalyzer.
D. The testing sites will provide detailed reports of the findings and analyses
of the test results to the MRO before forwarding to the DHR. The report
will include each substance tested and the results, as required by
guidelines established by the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services.
E. The DHR receives a summary report indicating that the employee's test is
positive or negative.
F. Employees testing positive for proper use of prescription or over-the-
counter medications are not in violation of this policy. However, for
purposes of this policy, marijuana (THC), including medical marijuana, is a
prohibited substance; not prescription medication.
G. The City is responsible for the initial costs associated with testing under
this Policy. Additional costs for independent tests requested by
employees are the responsibility of the requester.
IV. Testing Categories
A. The City shall conduct pre-employment drug and alcohol testing for all
positions as required by, but not limited to, the Department of
Transportation ("DOT") 49 CRF Part 40; Federal Aviation Act ("FAA") 14
CFR Part 120; Omnibus Transportation Employees Testing Act of 1991;
Commercial Driver License ("CDL") Drivers; CDL Holders; all positions
within the Department of Public Safety; all positions that require the
operation of heavy equipment, machines, and/or mechanical tools; and
safety-sensitive and/or security-sensitive positions as identified by the
Department of Human Resources, collective bargaining agreements,
and/or other federal, state, or local laws once an applicant receives a
conditional offer of employment. Pre-employment testing is done prior to
an employee's first day of employment.
B. Random Testing is an unannounced testing of employees selected from a
pool of employees where there is no suspicion of drug and/or alcohol

Page | 6

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
use. Randomly selected employees must immediately submit for testing.
Every employee subject to Random Testing has an equal chance of being
selected for a random drug test. Employees designated as "safety
sensitive" or under DOT regulations are required to be tested randomly.
Employees defined as "safety sensitive" under respective collective
bargaining agreements will also be tested randomly in accordance with
the terms of the CBA.
C. Reasonable Suspicion Testing is conducted after an employee is
suspected of using or being under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs
while at work or if there is a report or observation of drug, or alcohol use,
possession, or distribution while on the job. These specific physical,
behavioral, or performance indicators may include, but are not limited to,
the following:
1. Balance or gait problems, e.g., lack of balance, unsteady or
staggered walk, muscle twitching, red, water, or glassy eyes, dilated
or constricted pupils, or having difficultly focusing eyes;
2. Disorientation, uncoordinated movement of body and hands,
flushing of the face/cheeks, slurred speech, memory loss, or
drowsiness;
3. An observation may be any of the behaviors described in this
policy, direct observation of consumption, or other indications
such as, but not limited to odor, irritability, anxiety, or inability to
communicate coherently;
4. Absenteeism, tardiness, AWOL, or a pattern of absence from work;
5. Deteriorating work performance;
6. If the City receives information from a law enforcement agency
that an employee is the focus of a criminal investigation into
unauthorized drug possession, use, or trafficking;
7. A report of alcohol or other drug use provided by a reliable and
credible source.
When there is reasonable suspicion/cause that an employee is using
illegal drugs or alcohol at work, the following procedure should be
followed:

Page | 7

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
1.   If an employee is suspected of being under the influence of drugs
and/or alcohol by a co-worker, the co-worker should immediately
report the suspicion to his/her supervisor. If an employee is
suspected of being under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol by
his/her supervisor, the supervisor should immediately contact
another supervisor to serve as a witness and complete the requisite
reasonable suspicion forms. The behavior should be documented
and reported it to his/her Appointing Authority and/or their
designee and the DHR.
2. The DHR is responsible for analyzing the information provided by
the supervisor to make an informed decision as to whether the
circumstances justify sending the employee suspected of illegal
drug or alcohol use for a reasonable suspicion test.
3. If the DHR orders a drug and alcohol test, the supervisor shall
immediately notify the employee that he/she is being directed to
submit to a drug and alcohol test.
4. If the employee agrees to submit to the drug and alcohol test,
he/she will be transported by his/her supervisor, or a supervisor's
designee to the City's designated testing facility.
5. An employee who refuses to submit to a drug and alcohol test will
be subject to discipline, up to and including termination of
employment. Any lack of cooperation or significant delay on the
part of the employee shall be deemed a refusal. A refusal shall be
deemed a positive test result.
6. After the employee has submitted to the drug and alcohol test,
he/she shall be relieved of duty for the remainder of the day.
Furthermore, he/she will not report to work until the DHR has
received the results of the drug and alcohol test.
7. The DHR will notify the employee's appointing authority or his/her
designee of the results (positive/negative) of the drug and alcohol
test. The actual results will be kept confidential in the DHR and will
not be placed in the employee's personnel file.
8. If the employee produces an initial positive drug or alcohol screen,
the appointing authority or his/her designee shall hold a pre-

Page | 8

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
disciplinary hearing with the employee to advise the employee of
the results, and inform the employee that he/she must enroll in
the City's Employee Assistance Program (EAP). The employee shall
also be informed that he/she may receive a copy of the results by
request, from contacting the DHR. The employee will not be
reimbursed for time lost while waiting on the results. Please see the
Positive Results Procedure Section of this Policy for additional
information.
9. If the employee produces a negative drug and alcohol screen, the
appointing authority or his/her designee shall hold a meeting with
the employee to advise him/her of the results. Furthermore, the
employee shall be reimbursed for any time lost while waiting on the
results.
10. Failure to comply with any of the requirements of acknowledgment
or failing a second drug and alcohol test shall result in discipline up
to and including termination of employment. If the employee is
found to have failed a second drug and alcohol test or refused to
comply with any of the requirements of acknowledgment, the
employee shall be terminated.
D. Post-Accident Testing should occur as soon as practicable after any
incident or accident for all non-union employees and those union
employees with applicable language in their respective collective
bargaining agreements. An accident is defined as an unplanned,
unexpected, or unintended event that occurs at or on a city worksite
during an employee's work hours, or while conducting business for the
City. Accidents also include any incidents with or that involve a city-
supplied motor vehicle, machinery, or equipment. It must be determined
that an employee's conduct contributed to the accident in order to
perform a post-accident test.

1. Post-accident testing may be required for any City of Cleveland
employee involved in:
a. A fatality

Page | 9

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
b. Injury, presumed injury to an employee, co-worker,
bystander, or other person or persons requiring medical
attention on or off-site of the accident.

c. An accident causes vehicular damage (any property) or
damage to equipment.

d. An accident results in non-vehicular damage (any
property) in apparent excess of $1,000.00.

e. The City cannot completely discount the employee's
conduct as a contributing factor to the accident (non-
vehicular or vehicular).

2. Post-Accident Procedures
  a. When an employee is involved in an incident/accident, the
employee must report the incident/accident to the
supervisor, manager, unit leader as soon as practicable. The
appropriate division or department representative shall
contact the DHR.
b. After notification of an accident, the DHR will review and
may recommend post-accident testing.
 c. The DHR will contact the testing facility. The employee
will then immediately report to the testing facility. After the
test, the employee may return to work. Under applicable
CBAs, the DHR may be required to notify the union in
writing, which includes email or facsimile, of the test.
 d. When a post-accident test is ordered, and the employee
refuses to test, or the result of the test is positive for drugs
and/or alcohol, the employee may be disqualified for
compensation and benefits under the Ohio Workers'
Compensation Act.
 e.   Employees that refuse to test or test positive after an
accident remain subject to disciplinary action, up to and
including termination.

Page | 10

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
 f.    Test results and other information concerning substance
abuse investigations will be treated confidentially as
allowable under applicable laws. Test results and other
documents relating to investigations and/or rehabilitative
treatment will be kept separate from personnel records.
V. Positive Test Result Procedures

A. An employee who tests positive under this Policy shall be relieved from
duty without pay immediately.

B. Employees who test positive have the right to request an independent
test at a certified laboratory of their choice. Employees making this
request are responsible for the costs. The City's testing facility will send
the specimen to the independent testing facility at the employee's
request; the specimen will not be given to the employee directly. Any cost
of rehabilitation not covered by the employee's health insurance or health
insurance provided by other eligibility is the responsibility of the
employee.

C. An employee who tests positive for the first time for drugs or alcohol may
be offered rehabilitative treatment through the City's Employee
Assistance Program (EAP). An employee enrolled in a treatment program
may use accrued benefit time, including sick leave, but is not eligible for
sick time donation.

1. Follow-up treatment or assessment with the City of Cleveland's
Employee Assistance Provider occurs after an employee has tested
positive and/or has received treatment or assessment under this
Policy.

2. Before returning to duty and upon completion of the City's
designated rehabilitation program, the employee must undergo a
return-to-work drug test, and test negative for drugs or alcohol.
The return-to-work drug test is not included as one of the follow-
up tests in the first year. If the employee passes the return to work
drug and alcohol test, he/she may be permitted to return to work
under the conditions of the acknowledgment or Last Chance
Agreement (LCA). If the employee fails to pass the return to work

Page | 11

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
drug and alcohol test, he/she will be subject to discipline up to and
including termination of employment.

3. Upon returning to work, the employee is required to sign and
comply with a Last Chance Agreement (LCA). The LCA is effective
for one (1) year unless otherwise stated. An employee's failure to
comply with the terms if the LCA will be subject to discipline up to
and including termination of employment.

4. The employee is also subject to additional observed random follow-
up tests over a two (2) year period from the date of the employee's
return to duty.

VI. Diluted Specimen Procedures

When the Medical Review Officer (MRO) determines that a positive drug
screen is diluted, the test will be treated as a verified positive test. The
employee will not be directed to provide another test. When the MRO
determines that a negative drug test is dilute, the following action will be
taken:
A.  If the specimen is diluted, but not substituted, recollection will be
performed immediately.
B.  Recollection will be performed immediately under direct observation if
specific behaviors have been observed that include:
1. The collector identifies an attempt to alter a specimen has
occurred;
  2. The collector identifies an attempt to tamper with a specimen;
3. A specimen is reported as invalid because there is no adequate
medical explanation for the result.
4. When a positive, adulterated or substituted test result is
reported as a cancelled test because testing on the split
specimen could not be in  range.
  5. The temperature of the specimen falls out of the normal range.

Page | 12

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
6. Following a negative diluted sample, the employee will be
required to undergo another test. Should the second test result
be a negative dilute result, the test will be considered a positive
test result and the employee is required to sign and comply with
a Last Chance Agreement (LCA).
VIII.   Direct Observation Collection
A. The following may be circumstances may be subject to direct observation
collection:
1. Return-to-duty and follow-up drug and/or alcohol tests;
2. Random follow-up and reasonable suspicion drug and/or alcohol
tests;
3. Anytime the employee is directed to provide another specimen
because the temperature on the original specimen was out of the
accepted temperature range of 90F - 100F;
4. Anytime the employee is directed to provide another specimen
because the original specimen appeared to have been tampered with;
5. Anytime a collector observes materials brought to the collection site
or the employee's conduct clearly indicates an attempt to tamper with
a specimen;
6. Anytime the employee is directed to provide another specimen
because the laboratory reported to the MRO that the original
specimen was invalid and the MRO determined that there was not an
adequate medical explanation for the result;
7. Anytime the employee is directed to provide another specimen
because the MRO determined that the original specimen was positive,
adulterated, or substituted, but had to be cancelled because the test of
the split specimen could not be performed.
B.  Failure to comply with any of the above requirements shall subject an
employee to disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
1. The City encourages employees to seek assistance voluntarily for any
problems they may have with substance or alcohol before they lead to
injury, performance issues, and/or disciplinary actions. The City will

Page | 13

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
not consider an employee's decision to seek assistance voluntarily as
an independent reason for reasonable suspicion or discipline;
however, an employee's decision to seek assistance does not prevent
the City from bringing disciplinary action against the employee for
misconduct associated with the employee's use of drugs or alcohol.
IX.  Refusal to Submit to Drug and Alcohol Testing
A. An employee who fails to make themselves available for drug and alcohol
testing when required under any of the above-referenced testing
categories will be deemed to have refused to test. An employee who
refuses to submit to a drug and alcohol test may be subject to disciplinary
action, up to and including termination.
B. Refusal can include, but is not limited to, the following:
1. Unauthorized departure from the worksite following notification of
testing;
2. Unauthorized departure from the testing facility prior to testing;
3. Any employee conduct that interferes with the testing process;
4. Substitution or alteration of urine specimen or other clinical material;
5. Failure to comply with testing instructions; or
6. Any behavior that constitutes refusal under DOT or other applicable
regulations.
X.  Other Consequences
A. Although the City's efforts in establishing this Policy are to encourage
employees to commit themselves to a workplace free of drugs and
alcohol, those employees testing positive for drugs or alcohol, resulting in
injury to person or property, or testing positive in a random test are
subject to immediate discipline up to and including termination. Other
conduct that may result in discipline, up to and including termination
includes:
1. Refusal to sign a Last Chance Agreement (LCA);
2. A second positive test result;

Page | 14

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
3. Failure to complete rehabilitation or dismissal from a rehabilitation
program;
4. Possession or sale of illegal drugs by an employee on or off city
property;
5. Arrest or indictment for possession or sale of illegal drugs;
6. Consuming alcohol or any prohibited substance while on duty;
7. Failure of a pre-employment drug and/or alcohol screen.
B. When an employee is arrested, charged, or indicted for illegal drug
possession, or drug-use, or for an alcohol-related offense; and where a
prosecutor refers the person to a diversion program (with or without a
plea or acknowledgment of wrongdoing) the employee is still subject to
administrative disciplinary action. In such cases, the employee is not
assured of continued employment while in a diversion program.

C. Law enforcement authorities may be contacted in relation to employee
drug-related criminal activity, when deemed appropriate by the DHR.
XI. Statement of Confidentiality/Privacy
Employee assistance program participation, testing procedures,
investigations, or other related information collected and maintained by the
City will be kept confidential unless legally required to be disclosed.
This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Signature
Director of Human Resources

Title

December 7, 2023

Date