--- PAGE 1 ---
Ohio Ethics Law
and Related Statutes

 The Ohio Ethics Commission

 Merom Brachman, Chairman
 Mark Vander Laan, Vice Chairman
 Megan Kelley
 Marty Ross-Dolen
 Christian H. Stickan
 Elizabeth E. Tracy

 Paul M. Nick, Executive Director

                 January 2026

TABLE OF CONTENTS

The Ohio Ethics Law:  Revised Code Chapter 102.

R.C. 102.01     Definitions .....................................................................................................  1

R.C. 102.02     Financial Disclosure ......................................................................................  2

R.C. 102.021   Post-Employment Disclosure  .......................................................................  7

R.C. 102.022   Financial Disclosure - Limited  .....................................................................  9

R.C. 102.03     Post-Employment, Conflicts of Interest  .......................................................  9

R.C. 102.031   Gifts - Members of the General Assembly ................................................... 13

R.C. 102.04     Representation, Sales of Goods and Services  .............................................. 14

R.C. 102.05     Ethics Commission, Creation and Duties  .................................................... 15

R.C. 102.06     Ethics Commission, Investigative Authority  ............................................... 15

R.C. 102.07     Ethics Commission, Confidentiality  ............................................................ 17

R.C. 102.08     Opinions, Immunity, Education [H.B. 285]  ................................................. 18

R.C. 102.08*   Opinions, Immunity, Education [H.B. 492]  ................................................. 18

R.C. 102.09     Responsibilities - Forms and Law  ................................................................ 19

R.C. 102.99     Penalties ........................................................................................................ 20

RELATED STATUTES:

R.C. 2921.01    Definitions .................................................................................................... 21

R.C. 2921.42    Public Contract Restrictions  ........................................................................ 22

R.C. 2921.421  Legal Business Associate Exemption  ......................................................... 23

R.C. 2921.43    Supplemental Compensation  ....................................................................... 24

THE OHIO ETHICS LAW: CHAPTER 102. OF THE REVISED CODE

Section 102.01  As used in this chapter:

 (A)    "Compensation"  means  money,  thing  of  value,  or  financial  benefit.    "Compensation"  does  not
include reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duties.
 (B)  "Public official or employee" means any person who is elected or appointed to an office or is an
employee of any public agency.  "Public official or employee" does not include a person elected or appointed to
the  office  of  precinct,  ward,  or  district  committee  member  under  section  3517.03  of  the  Revised  Code,  any
presidential elector, or any delegate to a national convention.  "Public official or employee" does not include a
person  who  is  a  teacher,  instructor,  professor,  or  other  kind  of  educator  whose  position  does  not  involve  the
performance of, or authority to perform, administrative or supervisory functions.
 (C)(1)  "Public  agency"  means  the  general  assembly,  all  courts,  any  department,  division,  institution,
board, commission, authority, bureau or other instrumentality of the state, a county, city, village, or township,
the five state retirement systems, or any other governmental entity.
 (2)  Notwithstanding  any  contrary  provision  of  division  (C)  (3)(a)  of  this  section,  "public  agency"
includes a regional council of governments established under Chapter 167. of the Revised Code.
 (3) "Public agency" does not include either of the following:
 (a) A department, division, institution, board, commission, authority, or other instrumentality of the state
or a county, municipal corporation, township, or other governmental entity that functions exclusively for cultural,
educational,  historical,  humanitarian,  advisory,  or  research  purposes;  that  does  not  expend  more  than  ten
thousand  dollars  per  calendar  year,  excluding  salaries  and  wages  of  employees;  and  whose  members  are
uncompensated;
 (b) The nonprofit corporation formed under section 187.01
 of the Revised Code.
 (D)  "Immediate family" means a spouse residing in the person's household and any dependent child.
 (E)  "Income" includes gross income as defined and used in the "Internal Revenue Code of 1986," 100
Stat. 2085, 26 U.S.C. 1, as amended, interest and dividends on obligations or securities of any state or of any
political subdivision or authority of any state or political subdivision, and interest or dividends on obligations of
any authority, commission, or instrumentality of the United States.
 (F)  Except as otherwise provided in division (A) of section 102.08 of the Revised Code, "appropriate
ethics commission" means:
 (1)    For  matters  relating  to  members  of  the  general  assembly,  employees  of  the  general  assembly,
employees  of  the  legislative  service  commission,  and  candidates  for  the  office  of  member  of  the  general
assembly, and  public  members  appointed  to  the  Ohio  constitutional  modernization  commission  under  section
103.63 of the Revised Code, the joint legislative ethics committee;
 (2)  For matters relating to judicial officers and employees, and candidates for judicial office, the board
of commissioners on grievances and discipline of the supreme court;
 (3)  For matters relating to all other persons, the Ohio ethics commission.
 (G)  "Anything of value" has the same meaning as provided in section 1.03 of the Revised Code and
includes, but is not limited to, a contribution as defined in section 3517.01 of the Revised Code.
 (H)  "Honorarium" means any payment made in consideration for any speech given, article published,
or attendance at any public or private conference, convention, meeting, social event, meal, or similar gathering.
"Honorarium" does not include ceremonial gifts or awards that have insignificant monetary value; unsolicited
gifts of nominal value or trivial items of informational value; or earned income from any person, other than a
legislative agent, for personal services that are customarily provided in connection with the practice of a bona
fide business, if that business initially began before the public official or employee conducting that business was
elected or appointed to the public official's or employee's office or position of employment.
 (I)  "Employer" means any person who, directly or indirectly, engages an executive agency lobbyist or
legislative agent.
 (J)  "Executive agency decision," "executive agency lobbyist," and "executive agency lobbying activity"
have the same meanings as in section 121.60 of the Revised Code.
 (K)  "Legislation," "legislative agent," "financial transaction," and "actively advocate" have the same
meanings as in section 101.70 of the Revised Code.

2

 (L)  "Expenditure" has the same meaning as in section 101.70 of the Revised Code when used in relation
to activities of a legislative agent, and the same meaning as in section 121.60 of the Revised Code when used in
relation to activities of an executive agency lobbyist.

Sec. 102.02.
(A)(1) Except as otherwise provided in division (H) of this section, all of the following shall file with
the appropriate ethics commission the disclosure statement described in this division on a form prescribed by
the appropriate commission: every person who is elected to or is a candidate for a state, county, or city office
and every person who is appointed to fill a vacancy for an unexpired term in such an elective office; all
members of the state board of education; the director, assistant directors, deputy directors, division chiefs, or
persons of equivalent rank of any administrative department of the state; the president or other chief
administrative officer of every state institution of higher education as defined in section 3345.011 of the
Revised Code; the executive director and the members of the capitol square review and advisory board
appointed or employed pursuant to section 105.41 of the Revised Code; all members of the Ohio casino control
commission, the executive director of the commission, all professional employees of the commission, and all
technical employees of the commission who perform an internal audit function; the individuals set forth in
division (B)(2) of section 187.03 of the Revised Code; the chief executive officer and the members of the
board of each state retirement system; each employee of a state retirement board who is a state retirement
system investment officer licensed pursuant to section 1707.163 of the Revised Code; the members of the Ohio
retirement study council appointed pursuant to division (C) of section 171.01 of the Revised Code; employees
of the Ohio retirement study council, other than employees who perform purely administrative or clerical
functions; the administrator of workers' compensation and each member of the bureau of workers'
compensation board of directors; the bureau of workers' compensation director of investments; the chief
investment officer of the bureau of workers' compensation; all members of the board of commissioners on
grievances and discipline of the supreme court and the ethics commission created under section 102.05 of the
Revised Code; every business manager, treasurer, or superintendent of a city, local, exempted village, joint
vocational, or cooperative education school district or an educational service center; every person who is
elected to or is a candidate for the office of member of a board of education of a city, local, exempted village,
joint vocational, or cooperative education school district or of a governing board of an educational service
center that has a total student count of twelve thousand or more as most recently determined by the department
of education pursuant appointed to the board of education of a municipal school district pursuant to division
(B) or (F) of section 3311.71 of the Revised Code; all members of the board of directors of a sanitary district
that is established under Chapter 6115. of the Revised Code and organized wholly for the purpose of providing
a water supply for domestic, municipal, and public use, and that includes two municipal corporations in two
counties; every public official or employee who is paid a salary or wage in accordance with schedule C of
section 124.15 or schedule E-2 of section 124.152 of the Revised Code; members of the board of trustees and
the executive director of the southern Ohio agricultural and community development foundation; all members
appointed to the Ohio livestock care standards board under section 904.02 of the Revised Code; all
entrepreneurs in residence assigned by the LeanOhio office in the department of administrative services under
section 125.65 of the Revised Code and every other public official or employee who is designated by the
appropriate ethics commission pursuant to division (B) of this section.
(2) The disclosure statement shall include all of the following:
(a) The name of the person filing the statement and each member of the person's immediate family and
all names under which the person or members of the person's immediate family do business;
(b)(i) Subject to divisions (A)(2)(b)(ii) and (iii) of this section and except as otherwise provided in
section 102.022 of the Revised Code, identification of every source of income, other than income from a
legislative agent identified in division (A)(2)(b)(ii) of this section, received during the preceding calendar year,
in the person's own name or by any other person for the person's use or benefit, by the person filing the
statement, and a brief description of the nature of the services for which the income was received. If the person
filing the statement is a member of the general assembly, the statement shall identify the amount of every

3

source of income received in accordance with the following ranges of amounts: zero or more, but less than one
thousand dollars; one thousand dollars or more, but less than ten thousand dollars; ten thousand dollars or
more, but less than twenty-five thousand dollars; twenty-five thousand dollars or more, but less than fifty
thousand dollars; fifty thousand dollars or more, but less than one hundred thousand dollars; and one hundred
thousand dollars or more. Division (A)(2)(b)(i) of this section shall not be construed to require a person filing
the statement who derives income from a business or profession to disclose the individual items of income that
constitute the gross income of that business or profession, except for those individual items of income that are
attributable to the person's or, if the income is shared with the person, the partner's, solicitation of services or
goods or performance, arrangement, or facilitation of services or provision of goods on behalf of the business
or profession of clients, including corporate clients, who are legislative agents. A person who files the
statement under this section shall disclose the identity of and the amount of income received from a person
who the public official or employee knows or has reason to know is doing or seeking to do business of any
kind with the public official's or employee's agency.
(ii) If the person filing the statement is a member of the general assembly, the statement shall identify
every source of income and the amount of that income that was received from a legislative agent during the
preceding calendar year, in the person's own name or by any other person for the person's use or benefit, by the
person filing the statement, and a brief description of the nature of the services for which the income was
received. Division (A)(2)(b)(ii) of this section requires the disclosure of clients of attorneys or persons licensed
under section 4732.12 of the Revised Code, or patients of persons licensed under section 4731.14 of the
Revised Code, if those clients or patients are legislative agents. Division (A)(2)(b)(ii) of this section requires a
person filing the statement who derives income from a business or profession to disclose those individual items
of income that constitute the gross income of that business or profession that are received from legislative
agents.
(iii) Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(2)(b)(iii) of this section, division (A)(2)(b)(i) of this
section applies to attorneys, physicians, and other persons who engage in the practice of a profession and who,
pursuant to a section of the Revised Code, the common law of this state, a code of ethics applicable to the
profession, or otherwise, generally are required not to reveal, disclose, or use confidences of clients, patients,
or other recipients of professional services except under specified circumstances or generally are required to
maintain those types of confidences as privileged communications except under specified circumstances.
Division (A)(2)(b)(i) of this section does not
require an attorney, physician, or other professional subject to a confidentiality requirement as described in
division (A)(2)(b)(iii) of this section to disclose the name, other identity, or address of a client, patient, or other
recipient of professional services if the disclosure would threaten the client, patient, or other recipient of
professional services, would reveal details of the subject matter for which legal, medical, or professional advice
or other services were sought, or would reveal an otherwise privileged communication involving the client,
patient, or other recipient of professional services.
(c) The name of every corporation on file with the secretary of state that is incorporated in this state or
holds a certificate of compliance authorizing it to do business in this state, trust, business trust, partnership, or
association that transacts business in this state in which the person filing the statement or any other person for
the person's use and benefit had during the preceding calendar year an investment of over one thousand dollars
at fair market value as of the thirty-first day of December of the preceding calendar year, or the date of
disposition, whichever is earlier, or in which the person holds any office or has a fiduciary relationship, and a
description of the nature of the investment, office, or relationship. Division (A)(2)(c) of this section does not
require disclosure of the name of any bank, savings and loan association, credit union, or building and loan
association with which the person filing the statement has a deposit or a withdrawable share account.
(d) All fee simple and leasehold interests to which the person filing the statement holds legal title to or
a beneficial interest in real property located within the state, excluding the person's residence and property used
primarily for personal recreation;
(e) The names of all persons residing or transacting business in the state to whom the person filing the
statement owes, in the person's own name or in the name of any other person, more than one thousand dollars.

4

Division (A)(2)(e) of this section shall not be construed to require the disclosure of debts owed by the person
resulting from the ordinary conduct of a business or profession or debts on the person's residence or real
property used primarily for personal recreation, except that the superintendent of financial institutions shall
disclose the names of all state-chartered savings and loan associations and of all service corporations subject to
regulation under division (E)(2) of section 1151.34 of the Revised Code to whom the superintendent in the
superintendent's own name or in the name of any other person owes any money, and that the superintendent
and any deputy superintendent of banks shall disclose the names of all state-chartered banks and all bank
subsidiary corporations subject to regulation under section Am. 1109.44 of the Revised Code to whom the
superintendent or deputy superintendent owes any money.
(f) The names of all persons residing or transacting business in the state, other than a depository
excluded under division (A)(2)(c) of this section, who owe more than one thousand dollars to the person filing
the statement, either in the person's own name or to any person for the person's use or benefit. Division
(A)(2)(f) of this section shall not be construed to require the disclosure of clients of attorneys or persons
licensed under section 4732.12 of the Revised Code, or patients of persons licensed under section 4731.14 of
the Revised Code, nor the disclosure of debts owed to the person resulting from the ordinary conduct of a
business or profession.
(g) Except as otherwise provided in section 102.022 of the Revised Code, the source of each gift of
over seventy-five dollars, or of each gift of over twenty-five dollars received by a member of the general
assembly from a legislative agent, received by the person in the person's own name or by any other person for
the person's use or benefit during the preceding calendar year, except gifts received by will or by virtue of
section 2105.06 of the Revised Code, or received from spouses, parents, grandparents, children, grandchildren,
siblings, nephews, nieces, uncles, aunts, brothers-in-law, sisters-in-law, sons-in-law, daughters-in-law, fathers-
in-law, mothers-in-law, or any person to whom the person filing the statement stands in loco parentis, or
received by way of distribution from any inter vivos or testamentary trust established by a spouse or by an
ancestor;
(h) Except as otherwise provided in section 102.022 of the Revised Code, identification of the source
and amount of every payment of expenses incurred for travel to destinations inside or outside this state that is
received by the person in the person's own name or by any other person for the person's use or benefit and that
is incurred in connection with the person's official duties, except for expenses for travel to meetings or
conventions of a national or state organization to which any state agency, including, but not limited to, any
legislative agency or state institution of higher education as defined in section 3345.011 of the Revised Code,
pays membership dues, or any political subdivision or any office or agency of a political subdivision pays
membership dues;
(i) Except as otherwise provided in section 102.022 of the Revised Code, identification of the source of
payment of expenses for meals and other food and beverages, other than for meals and other food and
beverages provided at a meeting at which the person participated in a panel, seminar, or speaking engagement
or at a meeting or convention of a national or state organization to which any state agency, including, but not
limited to, any legislative agency or state institution of higher education as defined in section 3345.011 of the
Revised Code, pays membership dues, or any political subdivision or any office or agency of a political
subdivision pays membership dues, that are incurred in connection with the person's official duties and that
exceed one hundred dollars aggregated per calendar year; (j) If the disclosure statement is filed by a public
official or employee described in division (B)(2) of section 101.73 of the Revised Code or division (B)(2) of
section 121.63 of the Revised Code who receives a statement from a legislative agent, executive agency
lobbyist, or employer that contains the information described in division (F)(2) of section 101.73 of the
Revised Code or division (G)(2) of section 121.63 of the Revised Code, all of the nondisputed information
contained in the statement delivered to that public official or employee by the legislative agent, executive
agency lobbyist, or employer under division (F)(2) of section 101.73 or (G)(2) of section 121.63 of the Revised
Code.
(3) A person may file a statement required by this section in person, by mail, or by electronic means.

5

(4) A person who is required to file a statement under this section shall file that statement according to
the following deadlines, as applicable:
(a) Except as otherwise provided in divisions (A)(4)(b), (c), and (d) of this section, the person shall file
the statement not later than the fifteenth day of May of each year.
(b) A person who is a candidate for elective office shall file the statement no later than the thirtieth day
before the primary, special, or general election at which the candidacy is to be voted on, whichever election
occurs soonest, except that a person who is a write-in candidate shall file the statement no later than the
twentieth day before the earliest election at which the person's candidacy is to be voted on.
(c) A person who is appointed to fill a vacancy for an unexpired term in an elective office shall file the
statement within fifteen days after the person qualifies for office.
(d) A person who is appointed or employed after the fifteenth day of May, other than a person
described in division (A)(4)(c) of this section, shall file an annual statement within ninety days after
appointment or employment.
(5) No person shall be required to file with the appropriate ethics commission more than one statement
or pay more than one filing fee for any one calendar year.
(6) The appropriate ethics commission, for good cause, may extend for a reasonable time the deadline
for filing a statement under this section.
(7) A statement filed under this section is subject to public inspection at locations designated by the
appropriate ethics commission except as otherwise provided in this section.
(B) The Ohio ethics commission, the joint legislative ethics committee, and the board of
commissioners on grievances and discipline of the supreme court, using the rule-making procedures of Chapter
119. of the Revised Code, may require any class of public officials or employees under its jurisdiction and not
specifically excluded by this section whose positions involve a substantial and material exercise of
administrative discretion in the formulation of public policy, expenditure of public funds, enforcement of laws
and rules of the state or a county or city, or the execution of other public trusts, to file an annual statement
under division (A) of this section. The appropriate ethics commission shall send the public officials or
employees written notice of the requirement not less than thirty days before the applicable filing deadline
unless the public official or employee is appointed after that date, in which case the notice shall be sent within
thirty days after appointment, and the filing shall be made not later than ninety days after appointment.
Disclosure statements filed under this division with the Ohio ethics commission by members of boards,
commissions, or bureaus of the state for which no compensation is received other than reasonable and
necessary expenses shall be kept confidential. Disclosure statements filed with the Ohio ethics commission
under division (A) of this section by business managers, treasurers, and superintendents of city, local,
exempted village, joint vocational, or cooperative education school districts or educational service centers shall
be kept confidential, except that any person conducting an audit of any such school district or educational
service center pursuant to section 115.56 or Chapter 117. of the Revised Code may examine the disclosure
statement of any business manager, treasurer, or superintendent of that school district or educational service
center. Disclosure statements filed with the Ohio ethics commission under division (A) of this section by the
individuals set forth in division (B)(2) of section 187.03 of the Revised Code shall be kept confidential. The
Ohio ethics commission shall examine each disclosure statement required to be kept confidential to determine
whether a potential conflict of interest exists for the person who filed the disclosure statement. A potential
conflict of interest exists if the private interests of the person, as indicated by the person's disclosure statement,
might interfere with the public interests the person is required to serve in the exercise of the person's authority
and duties in the person's office or position of employment. If the commission determines that a potential
conflict of interest exists, it shall notify the person who filed the disclosure statement and shall make the
portions of the disclosure statement that indicate a potential conflict of interest subject to public inspection in
the same manner as is provided for other disclosure statements. Any portion of the disclosure statement that the
commission determines does not indicate a potential conflict of interest shall be kept confidential by the
commission and shall not be made subject to public inspection, except as is necessary for the enforcement of
Chapters 102. and 2921. of the Revised Code and except as otherwise provided in this division.

6

(C) No person shall knowingly fail to file, on or before the applicable filing deadline established under
this section, a statement that is required by this section.
(D) No person shall knowingly file a false statement that is required to be filed under this section.
(E)(1) Except as provided in divisions (E)(2) and (3) of this section, the statement required by division
(A) or (B) of this section shall be accompanied by a filing fee of sixty dollars.
(2) The statement required by division (A) of this section shall be accompanied by the following filing
fee to be paid by the person who is elected or appointed to, or is a candidate for, any of the following
offices:
For state office, except member of the state board of education     $95
For office of member of general assembly     $40
For county office        $60
For city office         $35
For office of member of the state board of education    $35
For office of member of a city, local, exempted village,
or cooperative education board of education or educational
service center governing board       $30
For position of business manager, treasurer, or superintendent
of a city, local, exempted village, joint vocational, or cooperative
education school district or educational service center    $30
(3) No judge of a court of record or candidate for judge of a court of record, and no referee or
magistrate serving a court of record, shall be required to pay the fee required under division (E)(1) or
(2) or (F) of this section.
(4) For any public official who is appointed to a nonelective office of the state and for any employee
who holds a nonelective position in a public agency of the state, the state agency that is the primary
employer of the state official or employee shall pay the fee required under division (E)(1) or (F) of this
section.
(F) If a statement required to be filed under this section is not filed by the date on which it is required
to be filed, the appropriate ethics commission shall assess the person required to file the statement a
late filing fee of ten dollars for each day the statement is not filed, except that the total amount of the
late filing fee shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars.
(G)(1) The appropriate ethics commission other than the Ohio ethics commission and the joint
legislative ethics committee shall deposit all fees it receives under divisions (E) and (F) of this section
into the general revenue fund of the state.
(2) The Ohio ethics commission shall deposit all receipts, including, but not limited to, fees it receives
under divisions (E) and (F) of this section, investigative or other fees, costs, or other funds it receives
as a result of court orders, and all moneys it receives from settlements under division (G) of section
102.06 of the Revised Code, into the Ohio ethics commission fund, which is hereby created in the state
treasury. All moneys credited to the fund shall be used solely for expenses related to the operation and
statutory functions of the commission.
(3) The joint legislative ethics committee shall deposit all receipts it receives from the payment of
financial disclosure statement filing fees under divisions (E) and (F) of this section into the joint
legislative ethics committee investigative and financial disclosure fund.
(H) Division (A) of this section does not apply to a person elected or appointed to the office of
precinct, ward, or district committee member under Chapter 3517. of the Revised Code; a presidential
elector; a delegate to a national convention; village or township officials and employees; any physician
or psychiatrist who is paid a salary or wage in accordance with schedule C of section 124.15 or
schedule E-2 of section 124.152 of the Revised Code and whose primary duties do not require the
exercise of administrative discretion; or any member of a board, commission, or bureau of any county
or city who receives less than one thousand dollars per year for serving in that position.

7

Sec. 102.021

 (A)(1)    For  the  twenty-four  month  period  immediately  following  the  end  of  the  former  state  elected
officer's or staff member's service or public employment, except as provided in division (B) or (D) of this section,
each former state elected officer or staff member who filed or was required to file a disclosure statement under
section 102.02 of the Revised Code shall file, on or before the deadlines specified in division (D) of this section,
with the joint legislative ethics committee a statement that shall include the information described in divisions
(A)(2), (3), (4), and (5) of this section, as applicable. The statement shall be filed on a form and in the manner
specified by the joint legislative ethics committee. This division does not apply to a state elected officer or staff
member who filed or was required to file a disclosure statement under section 102.02 of the Revised Code, who
leaves service or public employment, and who takes another position as a state elected officer or staff member
who files or is required to file a disclosure statement under that section.
 No person shall fail to file, on or before the deadlines specified in division (D) of this section, a statement
that is required by this division.
 (2)  The statement referred to in division (A)(1) of this section shall describe the source of all income
received, in the former state elected officer's or staff member's own name or by any other person for the person's
use or benefit, and briefly describe the nature of the services for which the income was received if the source of
the income was any of the following:
(a) An executive agency lobbyist or a legislative agent;
 (b) The employer of an executive agency lobbyist or legislative agent, except that this division does not
apply if the employer is any state agency or political subdivision of the state;
 (c) Any entity, association, or business that, at any time during the two immediately preceding calendar
years, was awarded one or more contracts by one or more state agencies that in the aggregate had a value of one
hundred thousand dollars or more, or bid on one or more contracts to be awarded by one or more state agencies
that in the aggregate had a value of one hundred thousand dollars or more.
 (3) If the former state elected officer or staff member received no income as described in division (A)(2)
of this section, the statement referred to in division (A)(1) of this section shall indicate that fact.
 (4) If the former state elected officer or staff member directly or indirectly made, either separately or in
combination  with  another,  any  expenditure  or  gift  for  transportation,  lodging,  or  food  or  beverages  to,  at  the
request of, for the benefit of, or on behalf of any public officer or employee, and if the former state elected officer
or staff member would be required to report the expenditure or gift in a statement under sections 101.70 to 101.79
or sections 121.60 to 121.69 of the Revised Code, whichever is applicable, if the former state elected officer or
staff member was a legislative agent or executive agency lobbyist at the time the expenditure or gift was made,
the  statement  referred  to  in  division  (A)(1)  of  this  section  shall  include  all  information  relative  to  that  gift  or
expenditure that would be required in a statement under sections 101.70 to 101.79 or sections 121.60 to 121.69
of the Revised Code if the former state elected officer or staff member was a legislative agent or executive agency
lobbyist at the time the expenditure or gift was made.
 (5) If the former state elected officer or staff member made no expenditure or gift as described in division
(A)(4) of this section, the statement referred to in division (A)(1) of this section shall indicate that fact.
 (B)  If,  at  any  time  during  the  twenty-four  month  period  immediately  following  the  end  of  the  former
state  elected  officer's  or  staff  member's  service  or  public  employment,  a  former  state  elected  officer  or  staff
member  who  filed  or  was  required  to  file  a  disclosure  statement  under  section  102.02  of  the  Revised  Code
becomes  a  legislative  agent  or  an  executive  agency  lobbyist,  the  former  state  elected  officer  or  staff  member
shall comply with all registration and filing requirements set forth in sections 101.70 to 101.79 or sections 121.60
to 121.69 of the Revised Code, whichever is applicable, and, the former state elected officer or staff member also
shall file a statement under division (A)(1) of this section except that the statement filed under division (A)(1) of
this section does not need to include information regarding any income source, expenditure, or gift to the extent
that  that  information  was  included  in  any  registration  or  statement  filed  under  sections  101.70  to  101.79  or
sections 121.60 to 121.69 of the Revised Code.
 (C)  Except as otherwise provided in this division, division (A)(2) of this section applies to attorneys,
physicians, and other persons who engage in the practice of a profession and who, pursuant to a section of the
Revised Code, the common law of this state, a code of ethics applicable to the profession, or otherwise, generally
are  required  not  to  reveal,  disclose,  or  use  confidences  of  clients,  patients,  or  other  recipients  of  professional
services except under specified circumstances or generally are required to maintain those types of confidences

8

as  privileged  communications  except  under  specified  circumstances.  Division  (A)(2)  of  this  section  does  not
require an attorney, physician, or other professional subject to a confidentiality requirement as described in this
division  to  disclose  the  name,  other  identity,  or  address  of  a  client,  patient,  or  other  recipient  of  professional
services  if  the  disclosure  would  threaten  the  client,  patient,  or  other  recipient  of  professional  services,  would
reveal details of the subject matter for which legal, medical, or professional advice or other services were sought,
or  would  reveal  an  otherwise  privileged  communication  involving  the  client,  patient,  or  other  recipient  of
professional services. Division (A)(2) of this section does not require an attorney, physician, or other professional
subject to a confidentiality requirement as described in this division to disclose in the brief description of the
nature of services required by division (A)(2) of this section any information pertaining to specific professional
services rendered for a client, patient, or other recipient of professional services that would reveal details of the
subject  matter  for  which  legal,  medical,  or  professional  advice  was  sought  or  would  reveal  an  otherwise
privileged communication involving the client, patient, or other recipient of professional services.
 (D)(1)  Each state elected officer or staff member who filed or was required to file a disclosure statement
under  section  102.02  of  the  Revised  Code  and  who  leaves  public  service  or  public  employment  shall  file  an
initial  statement  under  division  (A)(1)  of  this  section  not  later  than  the  day  on  which  the  former  state  elected
officer or staff member leaves public service or public employment. The initial statement shall specify whether
the person will, or will not, receive any income from a source described in division (A)(2)(a), (b), or (c) of this
section.
 If a person files an initial statement under this division that states that the person will receive income
from a source described in division (A)(2)(a), (b), or (c) of this section, the person is required to file statements
under division (A)(2), (3), (4), or (5) of this section at the times specified in division (D)(2) of this section.
 If a person files an initial statement under this division that states that the person will not receive income
from  a  source  described  in  division  (A)(2)(a),  (b),  or  (c)  of  this  section,  except  as  otherwise  provided  in  this
division, the person is not required to file statements under division (A)(2), (4), or (5) of this section or to file
subsequent  statements  under  division  (A)(3)  of  this  section.  If  a  person  files  an  initial  statement  under  this
division that states that the person will not receive income from a source described in division (A)(2)(a), (b), or
(c) of this section, and, subsequent to the filing of that initial statement, the person receives any income from a
source described in division (A)(2)(a), (b), or (c) of this section, the person within ten days shall file a statement
under  division  (A)(2)  of  this  section  that  contains  the  information  described  in  that  division,  and  the  person
thereafter  shall  file  statements  under  division  (A)(2),  (3),  (4),  or  (5)  of  this  section  at  the  times  specified  in
division (D)(2) of this section.
 (2) After the filing of the initial statement under division (D)(1) of this section, each person required to
file a statement under division (A)(2), (3), (4), or (5) of this section shall file it on or before the last calendar day
of January, May, and September. The statements described in divisions (A)(2), (3), and (5) of this section shall
relate to the sources of income the person received in the immediately preceding filing period from each source
of income in each of the categories listed in division (A)(2) of this section. The statement described in division
(A)(4) of this section shall include any information required to be reported regarding expenditures and gifts of
the  type  described  in  division  (A)(4)  of  this  section  occurring  since  the  filing  of  the  immediately  preceding
statement.
 If, pursuant to this division, a person files a statement under division (A)(2) of this section, the person is
required to file statements under division (A)(4) of this section, and subsequent statements under division (A)(2),
(3), or (5) of this section, at the times specified in this division. In addition, if, subsequent to the filing of the
statement  under  division  (A)(2)  of  this  section,  the  person  receives  any  income  from  a  source  described  in
division (A)(2)(a), (b), or (c) of this section that was not listed on the statement filed under division (A)(2) of
this section, the person within ten days shall file a statement under division (A)(2) of this section that contains
the information described in that division regarding the new income source.
 If, pursuant to this division, a person files a statement under division (A)(3) of this section, except as
otherwise provided in this division, the person thereafter is not required to file statements under division (A)(2),
(4), or (5) of this section, or to file subsequent statements under division (A)(3) of this section. If, subsequent to
the filing of the statement under division (A)(3) of this section, the person receives any income from a source
described in division (A)(2)(a), (b), or (c) of this section, the person within ten days shall file a statement under
division (A)(2) of this section that contains the information described in that division regarding the new income
source,  and  the  person  thereafter  shall  file  statements  under  division  (A)(4)  of  this  section,  and  subsequent
statements under division (A)(2) or (3) of this section, at the times specified in this division.

9

(3) No fee shall be required for filing a statement under this section, except that the joint legislative
ethics committee may charge late fees in the same manner as specified in division (G) of section 101.72 of the
Revised Code.
 (E)  Any state elected officer or staff member who filed or was required to file a disclosure statement
under section 102.02 of the Revised Code and who leaves public service or public employment shall provide a
forwarding address to the officer's or staff member's last employer, and the employer shall provide the person's
name and address to the joint legislative ethics committee. The former elected state officer or staff member shall
provide updated forwarding addresses as necessary to the joint legislative ethics committee during the twenty-
four month period during which division (A)(1) of this section applies. The public agency or appointing authority
that  was  the  last  employer  of  a  person  required  to  file  a  statement  under  division  (A)(2)  of  this  section  shall
furnish to the person a copy of the form needed to complete the initial statement required under division (D)(1)
of this section.
 (F)    During  the  twenty-four  month  period  immediately  following  the  end  of  the  former  state  elected
officer's or staff member's service or public employment, no person required to file a statement under this section
shall receive from a source described in division (A)(2)(a), (b), or (c) of this section, and no source described in
division (A)(2)(a), (b), or (c) of this section shall pay to that person, any compensation that is contingent in any
way upon the introduction, modification, passage, or defeat of any legislation or the outcome of any executive
agency decision.
 (G)  As used in this section "state elected officer or staff member" means any elected officer of this state,
any  staff,  as  defined  in  section  101.70  of  the  Revised  Code,  or  any  staff,  as  defined  in  section  121.60  of  the
Revised Code.

Sec. 102.022

Each person who is an officer or employee of a political subdivision, who receives compensation of
less than sixteen thousand dollars a year for holding an office or position of employment with that political
subdivision, and who is required to file a statement under section 102.02 of the Revised Code; each member of
the board of trustees of a state institution of higher education as defined in section 3345.011 of the Revised
Code who is required to file a statement under section 102.02 of the Revised Code; and each individual set
forth in division (B)(2) of section 187.03 of the Revised Code who is required to file a statement under section
102.02 of the Revised Code, shall include in that statement, in place of the information required by divisions
(A)(2)(b), (g), (h), and (i) of that section, the following information:
 (A)  Exclusive of reasonable expenses, identification of every source of income over five hundred dollars
received during the preceding calendar year, in the officer's or employee's own name or by any other person for
the officer's or employee's use or benefit, by the person filing the statement, and a brief description of the nature
of the services for which the income was received.  This division shall not be construed to require the disclosure
of clients of attorneys or persons licensed under section 4732.12 or 4732.15 of the Revised Code or patients of
persons certified under section 4731.14 of the Revised Code.  This division shall not be construed to require a
person filing the statement who derives income from a business or profession to disclose the individual items of
income that constitute the gross income of the business or profession.
 (B)    The  source  of  each  gift  of  over  five  hundred  dollars  received  by  the  person  in  the  officer's  or
employee's own name or by any other person for the officer's or employee's use or benefit during the preceding
calendar year, except gifts received by will or by virtue of section 2105.06 of the Revised Code, received from
parents, grandparents, children, grandchildren, siblings, nephews, nieces, uncles, aunts, brothers-in-law, sisters-
in-law, sons-in-law, daughters-in-law, fathers-in-law, mothers-in-law, or any person to whom the person filing
the  statement  stands  in  loco  parentis,  or  received  by  way  of  distribution  from  any  inter  vivos  or  testamentary
trust established by a spouse or by an ancestor.

Section 102.03

 (A)(1)  No present or former public official or employee shall, during public employment or service or
for twelve months thereafter, represent a client or act in a representative capacity for any person on any matter
in which the public official or employee personally participated as a public official or employee through decision,

10

approval, disapproval, recommendation, the rendering of advice, investigation, or other substantial exercise of
administrative discretion.
 (2)    For  twenty-four  months  after  the  conclusion  of  service,  no  former  commissioner  or  attorney
examiner of the public utilities commission shall represent a public utility, as defined in section 4905.02 of the
Revised Code, or act in a representative capacity on behalf of such a utility before any state board, commission,
or agency.
 (3)  For twenty-four months after the conclusion of employment or service, no former public official or
employee who personally participated as a public official or employee through decision, approval, disapproval,
recommendation,  the  rendering  of  advice,  the  development  or  adoption  of  solid  waste  management  plans,
investigation, inspection, or other substantial exercise of administrative discretion under Chapter 343. or 3734.
of  the  Revised  Code  shall  represent  a  person  who  is  the  owner  or  operator  of  a  facility,  as  defined  in  section
3734.01 of the Revised Code, or who is an applicant for a permit or license for a facility under that chapter, on
any matter in which the public official or employee personally participated as a public official or employee.
 (4)  For a period of one year after the conclusion of employment or service as a member or employee of
the  general  assembly,  no  former  member  or  employee  of  the  general  assembly  shall  represent,  or  act  in  a
representative capacity for, any person on any matter before the general assembly, any committee of the general
assembly,  or  the  controlling  board.    Division  (A)(4)  of  this  section  does  not  apply  to  or  affect  a  person  who
separates from service with the general assembly on or before December 31, 1995.  As used in division (A)(4)
of this section "person" does not include any state agency or political subdivision of the state.
 (5)    As  used  in  divisions  (A)(1),  (2),  and  (3)  of  this  section,  "matter"  includes  any  case,  proceeding,
application, determination, issue, or question, but does not include the proposal, consideration, or enactment of
statutes, rules, ordinances, resolutions, or charter or constitutional amendments.  As used in division (A)(4) of
this section, "matter" includes the proposal, consideration, or enactment of statutes, resolutions, or constitutional
amendments.  As used in division (A) of this section, "represent" includes any formal or informal appearance
before, or any written or oral communication with, any public agency on behalf of any person.
 (6)  Nothing contained in division (A) of this section shall prohibit, during such period, a former public
official or employee from being retained or employed to represent, assist, or act in a representative capacity for
the  public  agency  by  which  the  public  official  or  employee  was  employed  or  on  which  the  public  official  or
employee served.
 (7)    Division  (A)  of  this  section  shall  not  be  construed  to  prohibit  the  performance  of  ministerial
functions,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  the  filing  or  amendment  of  tax  returns,  applications  for  permits  and
licenses, incorporation papers, and other similar documents.
 (8)  Division  (A)  of  this  section  does  not  prohibit  a  nonelected  public  official  or  employee  of  a  state
agency, as defined in section 1.60 of the Revised Code, from becoming a public official or employee of another
state agency. Division (A) of this section does not prohibit such an official or employee from representing or
acting in a representative capacity for the official's or employee's new state agency on any matter in which the
public official or employee personally participated as a public official or employee at the official's or employee's
former state agency. However, no public official or employee of a state agency shall, during public employment
or for twelve months thereafter, represent or act in a representative capacity for the official's or employee's new
state agency on any audit or investigation pertaining to the official's or employee's new state agency in which the
public official or employee personally participated at the official's or employee's former state agency through
decision,  approval,  disapproval,  recommendation,  the  rendering  of  advice,  investigation,  or  other  substantial
exercise of administrative discretion.
 (9) Division (A) of this section does not prohibit a nonelected public official or employee of a political
subdivision from becoming a public official or employee of a different department, division, agency, office, or
unit of the same political subdivision. Division (A) of this section does not prohibit such an official or employee
from representing or acting in a representative capacity for the official's or employee's new department, division,
agency, office, or unit on any matter in which the public official or employee personally participated as a public
official  or  employee  at  the  official's  or  employee's  former  department,  division,  agency,  office,  or  unit  of  the
same political subdivision. As used in this division, "political subdivision" means a county, township, municipal
corporation, or any other body corporate and politic that is responsible for government activities in a geographic
area smaller than that of the state.

11

 (10)No present or former Ohio casino control commission official shall, during public service or for two
years thereafter, represent a client, be employed or compensated by a person regulated by the commission, or act
in a representative capacity for any person on any matter before or concerning the commission.
 No present or former commission employee shall, during public employment or for two years thereafter,
represent a client or act in a representative capacity on any matter in which the employee personally participated
as a commission employee through decision, approval, disapproval, recommendation, the rendering of advice,
investigation, or other substantial exercise of administrative discretion.
 (B)    No  present  or  former  public  official  or  employee  shall  disclose  or  use,  without  appropriate
authorization, any information acquired by the public official or employee in the course of the public official's
or  employee's  official  duties  that  is  confidential  because  of  statutory  provisions,  or  that  has  been  clearly
designated  to  the  public  official  or  employee  as  confidential  when  that  confidential  designation  is  warranted
because  of  the  status  of  the  proceedings  or  the  circumstances  under  which  the  information  was  received  and
preserving its confidentiality is necessary to the proper conduct of government business.
 (C)    No  public  official  or  employee  shall  participate  within  the  scope  of  duties  as  a  public  official  or
employee, except through ministerial functions as defined in division (A) of this section, in any license or rate-
making  proceeding  that  directly  affects  the  license  or  rates  of  any  person,  partnership,  trust,  business  trust,
corporation, or association in which the public official or employee or immediate family owns or controls more
than five per cent.  No public official or employee shall participate within the scope of duties as a public official
or  employee,  except  through  ministerial  functions  as  defined  in  division  (A)  of  this  section,  in  any  license  or
rate-making  proceeding  that  directly  affects  the  license  or  rates  of  any  person  to  whom  the  public  official  or
employee or immediate family, or a partnership, trust, business trust, corporation, or association of which the
public official or employee or the public official's or employee's immediate family owns or controls more than
five per cent, has sold goods or services totaling more than one thousand dollars during the preceding year, unless
the public official or employee has filed a written statement acknowledging that sale with the clerk or secretary
of the public agency and the statement is entered in any public record of the agency's proceedings.  This division
shall not be construed to require the disclosure of clients of attorneys or persons licensed under section 4732.12
or 4732.15 of the Revised Code, or patients of persons licensed under section 4731.14 of the Revised Code.
 (D)  No public official or employee shall use or authorize the use of the authority or influence of office
or employment to secure anything of value or the promise or offer of anything of value that is of such a character
as  to  manifest  a  substantial  and  improper  influence  upon  the  public  official  or  employee  with  respect  to  that
person's duties.
 (E)  No public official or employee shall solicit or accept anything of value that is of such a character as
to manifest a substantial and improper influence upon the public official or employee with respect to that person's
duties.
 (F)  No person shall promise or give to a public official or employee anything of value that is of such a
character as to manifest a substantial and improper influence upon the public official or employee with respect
to that person's duties.
 (G)    In  the  absence  of  bribery  or  another  offense  under  the  Revised  Code  or  a  purpose  to  defraud,
contributions  made  to  a  campaign  committee,  political  party,  legislative  campaign  fund,  political  action
committee,  or  political  contributing  entity  on  behalf  of  an  elected  public  officer  or  other  public  official  or
employee who seeks elective office shall be considered to accrue ordinarily to the public official or employee
for the purposes of divisions (D), (E), and (F) of this section.
 As used in this division, "contributions," "campaign committee," "political party," "legislative campaign
fund,"  "political  action  committee,"  and  "political  contributing  entity"  have  the  same  meanings  as  in  section
3517.01 of the Revised Code.
 (H)(1)  No public official or employee, except for the president or other chief administrative officer of
or a member of a board of trustees of a state institution of higher education as defined in section 3345.011 of the
Revised Code, who is required to file a financial disclosure statement under section 102.02 of the Revised Code
shall solicit or accept, and no person shall give to that public official or employee, an honorarium.  Except as
provided  in  division  (H)(2)  of  this  section,  this  division  and  divisions  (D),  (E),  and  (F)  of  this  section  do  not
prohibit a public official or employee who is required to file a financial disclosure statement under section 102.02
of the Revised Code from accepting and do not prohibit a person from giving to that public official or employee
the payment of actual travel expenses, including any expenses incurred in connection with the travel for lodging,
and  meals,  food,  and  beverages  provided  to  the  public  official  or  employee  at  a  meeting  at  which  the  public

12

official or employee participates in a panel, seminar, or speaking engagement or provided to the public official
or employee at a meeting or convention of a national organization to which any state agency, including, but not
limited to, any state legislative agency or state institution of higher education as defined in section 3345.011 of
the Revised Code, pays membership dues.  Except as provided in division (H)(2) of this section, this division
and divisions (D), (E), and (F) of this section do not prohibit a public official or employee who is not required to
file a financial disclosure statement under section 102.02 of the Revised Code from accepting and do not prohibit
a person from promising or giving to that public official or employee an honorarium or the payment of travel,
meal,  and  lodging  expenses  if  the  honorarium,  expenses,  or  both  were  paid  in  recognition  of  demonstrable
business, professional, or esthetic interests of the public official or employee that exist apart from public office
or employment, including, but not limited to, such a demonstrable interest in public speaking and were not paid
by any person or other entity, or by any representative or association of those persons or entities, that is regulated
by, doing business with, or seeking to do business with the department, division, institution, board, commission,
authority, bureau, or other instrumentality of the governmental entity with which the public official or employee
serves.
 (2)  No  person  who  is  a  member  of  the  board  of  a  state  retirement  system,  a  state  retirement  system
investment officer, or an employee of a state retirement system whose position involves substantial and material
exercise of discretion in the investment of retirement system funds shall solicit or accept, and no person shall
give to that board member, officer, or employee, payment of actual travel expenses, including expenses incurred
with the travel for lodging, meals, food, and beverages.
 (I)  A public official or employee may accept travel, meals, and lodging or expenses or reimbursement
of expenses for travel, meals, and lodging in connection with conferences, seminars, and similar events related
to official duties if the travel, meals, and lodging, expenses, or reimbursement is not of such a character as to
manifest a substantial and improper influence upon the public official or employee with respect to that person's
duties.  The house of representatives and senate, in their code of ethics, and the Ohio ethics commission, under
section  111.15  of  the  Revised  Code,  may  adopt  rules  setting  standards  and  conditions  for  the  furnishing  and
acceptance of such travel, meals, and lodging, expenses, or reimbursement.
 A person who acts in compliance with this division and any applicable rules adopted under it, or any
applicable, similar rules adopted by the supreme court governing judicial officers and employees, does not violate
division (D), (E), or (F) of this section.  This division does not preclude any person from seeking an advisory
opinion from the appropriate ethics commission under section 102.08 of the Revised Code.
 (J)  For purposes of divisions (D), (E), and (F) of this section, the membership of a public official or
employee in an organization shall not be considered, in and of itself, to be of such a character as to manifest a
substantial and improper influence on the public official or employee with respect to that person's duties.  As
used  in  this  division,  "organization"  means  a  church  or  a  religious,  benevolent,  fraternal,  or  professional
organization that is tax exempt under subsection 501(a) and described in subsection 501(c) (3), (4), (8), (10), or
(19) of the "Internal Revenue Code of 1986."  This division does not apply to a public official or employee who
is an employee of an organization, serves as a trustee, director, or officer of an organization, or otherwise holds
a fiduciary relationship with an organization.  This division does not allow a public official or employee who is
a member of an organization to participate, formally or informally, in deliberations, discussions, or voting on a
matter or to use the public official's or employee's official position with regard to the interests of the organization
on the matter if the public official or employee has assumed a particular responsibility in the organization with
respect to the matter or if the matter would affect that person's personal, pecuniary interests.
 (K)  It is not a violation of this section for a prosecuting attorney to appoint assistants and employees in
accordance with division (B) of section 309.06 and section 2921.421 of the Revised Code, for a chief legal officer
of a municipal corporation or an official designated as prosecutor in a municipal corporation to appoint assistants
and  employees  in  accordance  with  sections  733.621  and  2921.421  of  the  Revised  Code,  for  a  township  law
director appointed under section 504.15 of the Revised Code to appoint assistants and employees in accordance
with sections 504.151 and 2921.421 of the Revised Code, or for a coroner to appoint assistants and employees
in accordance with division (B) of section 313.05 of the Revised Code.
 As used in this division, "chief legal officer" has the same meaning as in section 733.621 of the Revised
Code.
 (L)  No  present  public  official  or  employee  with  a  casino  gaming  regulatory  function  shall  indirectly
invest, by way of an entity the public official or employee has an ownership interest or control in, or directly
invest in a casino operator, management company, holding company, casino facility, or gaming-related vendor.

13

No present public official or employee with a casino gaming regulatory function shall directly or indirectly have
a financial interest in, have an ownership interest in, be the creditor or hold a debt instrument issued by, or have
an  interest  in  a  contractual  or  service  relationship  with  a  casino  operator,  management  company,  holding
company,  casino  facility,  or  gaming-related  vendor.  This  section  does  not  prohibit  or  limit  permitted  passive
investing by the public official or employee.
 As  used  in  this  division,  "passive  investing"  means  investment  by  the  public  official  or  employee  by
means of a mutual fund in which the public official or employee has no control of the investments or investment
decisions.  "Casino  operator,"  "holding  company,"  "management  company,"  "casino  facility,"  and  "gaming-
related vendor" have the same meanings as in section 3772.01 of the Revised Code.
 (M) A member of the Ohio casino control commission, the executive director of the commission, or an
employee of the commission shall not:
 (1) Accept anything of value, including but not limited to a gift, gratuity, emolument, or employment
from a casino operator, management company, or other person subject to the jurisdiction of the commission, or
from an officer, attorney, agent, or employee of a casino operator, management company, or other person subject
to the jurisdiction of the commission;
 (2)  Solicit,  suggest,  request,  or  recommend,  directly  or  indirectly,  to  a  casino  operator,  management
company,  or  other  person  subject  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  commission,  or  to  an  officer,  attorney,  agent,  or
employee  of  a  casino  operator,  management  company,  or  other  person  subject  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the
commission, the appointment of a person to an office, place, position, or employment;
 (3) Participate in casino gaming or any other amusement or activity at a casino facility in this state or at
an affiliate gaming facility of a licensed casino operator, wherever located.
 In  addition  to  the  penalty  provided  in  section  102.99  of  the  Revised  Code,  whoever  violates  division
(M)(1), (2), or (3) of this section forfeits the individual's office or employment.

Sec. 102.031

 (A)  As used in this section:
 (1)   "Business associate" means a person with whom a member of the general assembly is conducting
or undertaking a financial transaction.
 (2)  "Contribution" has the same meaning as in section 3517.01 of the Revised Code.
 (3)  "Employee" does not include a member of the general assembly whose nonlegislative position of
employment  does  not  involve  the  performance  of  or  the  authority  to  perform  administrative  or  supervisory
functions; or whose nonlegislative position of employment, if the member is a public employee, does not involve
a substantial and material exercise of administrative discretion in the formulation of public policy, expenditure
of public funds, enforcement of laws and rules of the state or a county or city, or execution of other public trusts.
 (B)  No member of the general assembly shall vote on any legislation that the member knows is then
being actively advocated if the member is one of the following with respect to a legislative agent or employer
that is then actively advocating on that legislation:
 (1)  An employee;
 (2)  A business associate;
 (3)  A person, other than an employee, who is hired under contract to perform certain services, and that
position  involves  a  substantial  and  material  exercise  of  administrative  discretion  in  the  formulation  of  public
policy.
 (C)  No member of the general assembly shall knowingly accept any of the following from a legislative
agent or a person required to file a statement described in division (A)(2) of section 102.021 of the Revised Code:
 (1)  The payment of any expenses for travel or lodging except as otherwise authorized by division (H)
of section 102.03 of the Revised Code;
 (2)  More than seventy-five dollars aggregated per calendar year as payment for meals and other food
and beverages, other than for those meals and other food and beverages provided to the member at a meeting at
which  the  member  participates  in  a  panel,  seminar,  or  speaking  engagement,  at  a  meeting  or  convention  of  a
national  organization  to  which  any  state  agency,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  any  legislative  agency  or  state
institution of higher education as defined in section 3345.011 of the Revised Code, pays membership dues, or at
a dinner, party, or function to which all members of the general assembly or all members of either house of the
general assembly are invited;

14

 (3)  A gift of any amount in the form of cash or the equivalent of cash, or a gift of any other thing of
value whose value exceeds seventy-five dollars.  As used in division (C)(3) of this section, "gift" does not include
any  contribution  or  any  gifts  of  meals  and  other  food  and  beverages  or  the  payment  of  expenses  incurred  for
travel to destinations either inside or outside this state that is received by a member of the general assembly and
that is incurred in connection with the member's official duties.
 (D)  It is not a violation of division (C)(2) of this section if, within sixty days after receiving notice from
a  legislative  agent  that  the  legislative  agent  has  provided  a  member  of  the  general  assembly  with  more  than
seventy-five  dollars  aggregated  in  a  calendar  year  as  payment  for  meals  and  other  food  and  beverages,  the
member of the general assembly returns to that legislative agent the amount received that exceeds seventy-five
dollars.
 (E)  The joint legislative ethics committee may impose a fine of not more than one thousand dollars upon
a member of the general assembly who violates division (B) of this section.

Section 102.04

 (A)  Except as provided in division (D) of this section, no person elected or appointed to an office of or
employed by the general assembly or any department, division, institution, instrumentality, board, commission,
or bureau of the state, excluding the courts, shall receive or agree to receive directly or indirectly compensation
other than from the agency with which he serves for any service rendered or to be rendered by him personally in
any case, proceeding, application, or other matter that is before the general assembly or any department, division,
institution, instrumentality, board, commission, or bureau of the state, excluding the courts.
 (B)  Except as provided in division (D) of this section, no person elected or appointed to an office of or
employed by the general assembly or any department, division, institution, instrumentality, board, commission,
or bureau of the state, excluding the courts, shall sell or agree to sell, except through competitive bidding, any
goods  or  services  to  the  general  assembly  or  any  department,  division,  institution,  instrumentality,  board,
commission, or bureau of the state, excluding the courts.
 (C)  Except as provided in division (D) of this section, no person who is elected or appointed to an office
of or employed by a county, township, municipal corporation, or any other governmental entity, excluding the
courts,  shall  receive  or  agree  to  receive  directly  or  indirectly  compensation  other  than  from  the  agency  with
which he serves for any service rendered or to be rendered by him personally in any case, proceeding, application,
or other matter which is before any agency, department, board, bureau, commission, or other instrumentality,
excluding the courts, of the entity of which he is an officer or employee.
 (D)  A public official who is appointed to a nonelective office or a public employee shall be exempted
from division (A), (B), or (C) of this section if both of the following apply:
 (1)  The agency to which the official or employee wants to sell the goods or services, or before which
the matter that involves the rendering of his services is pending, is an agency other than the one with which he
serves;
 (2)  Prior to rendering the personal services or selling or agreeing to sell the goods or services, he files a
statement  with  the  appropriate  ethics  commission,  with  the  public  agency  with  which  he  serves,  and  with  the
public  agency  before  which  the  matter  is  pending  or  that  is  purchasing  or  has  agreed  to  purchase  goods  or
services.
 The required statement shall contain the official's or employee's name and home address, the name and
mailing address of the public agencies with which he serves and before which the matter is pending or that is
purchasing or has agreed to purchase goods or services, and a brief description of the pending matter and of the
personal services to be rendered or a brief description of the goods or services to be purchased.  The statement
shall also contain the public official's or employee's declaration that he disqualifies himself for a period of two
years from any participation as such public official or employee in any matter involving any public official or
employee of the agency before which the present matter is pending or to which goods or services are to be sold.
The  two-year  period  shall  run  from  the  date  of  the  most  recently  filed  statement  regarding  the  agency  before
which the matter was pending or to which the goods or services were to be sold.  No person shall be required to
file statements under this division with the same public agency regarding a particular matter more than once in
a calendar year.
 (E)  No public official or employee who files a statement or is required to file a statement under division
(D)  of  this  section  shall  knowingly  fail  to  disqualify  himself  from  any  participation  as  a  public  official  or

15

employee  of  the  agency  with  which  he  serves  in  any  matter  involving  any  official  or  employee  of  an  agency
before which a matter for which he rendered personal services was pending or of a public agency that purchased
or agreed to purchase goods or services.
 (F)  This section shall not be construed to prohibit the performance of ministerial functions including,
but not limited to, the filing, or amendment of tax returns, applications for permits and licenses, incorporation
papers, and other documents.

Section 102.05

 There is hereby created the Ohio ethics commission consisting of six members, three of whom shall be
members of each of the two major political parties, to be appointed by the governor with the advice and consent
of the senate.  Within thirty days of the effective date of this section, the governor shall make initial appointments
to the commission.  Of the initial appointments made to the commission, one shall be for a term ending one year
after the effective date of this section, and the other appointments shall be for terms ending two, three, four, five,
and six years, respectively, after the effective date of this section.  Thereafter, terms of office shall be for six
years, each term ending on the same day of the same month of the year as did the term that it succeeds.  Each
member shall hold office from the date of his appointment until the end of the term for which he was appointed.
Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the term for which his predecessor
was appointed shall hold office for the remainder of that term.
 No person shall be appointed to the commission or shall continue to serve as a member of the commission
if  the  person  is  subject  to  section  102.02  of  the  Revised  Code  other  than  by  reason  of  his  appointment  to  the
commission or if the person is a legislative agent registered under sections 101.70 to 101.79 of the Revised Code
or an executive agency lobbyist registered under sections 121.60 to 121.69 of the Revised Code.  Each member
shall  be  paid  seventy-five  dollars  for  each  meeting  held  in  the  discharge  of  his  official  duties,  except  that  no
member shall be paid more than eighteen hundred dollars in any fiscal year. Each member shall be reimbursed
for expenses actually and necessarily incurred in the performance of his official duties.
 The commission shall meet within two weeks after all members have been appointed, at a time and place
determined by the governor.  At its first meeting, the commission shall elect a chairman and other officers that
are necessary and shall adopt rules for its procedures.  After the first meeting, the commission shall meet at the
call of the chairman or upon the written request of a majority of the members.  A majority of the members of the
commission  constitutes  a  quorum.    The  commission  shall  not  take  any  action  without  the  concurrence  of  a
majority of the members of the commission.
 The  commission  may  appoint  and  fix  the  compensation  of  an  executive  director  and  other  technical,
professional, and clerical employees that are necessary to carry out the duties of the commission.
 The commission may appoint hearing examiners to conduct hearings pursuant to section 102.06 of the
Revised  Code.    The  hearing  examiners  have  the  same  powers  and  authority  in  conducting  the  hearings  as  is
granted  to  the  commission.    Within  thirty  days  after  the  hearing,  the  hearing  examiner  shall  submit  to  the
commission a written report of his findings of fact and conclusions of law and a recommendation of the action
to be taken by the commission.  The recommendation of the hearing examiner may be approved, modified, or
disapproved by the commission, and no recommendation shall become the findings of the commission until so
ordered by the commission.  The findings of the commission shall have the same effect as if the hearing had been
conducted  by  the  commission.    Hearing  examiners  appointed  pursuant  to  this  section  shall  possess  the
qualifications the commission requires.  Nothing contained in this section shall preclude the commission from
appointing a member of the commission to serve as a hearing examiner.

Section 102.06

 (A)  The appropriate ethics commission shall receive and may initiate complaints against persons subject
to this chapter concerning conduct alleged to be in violation of this chapter or section 2921.42 or 2921.43 of the
Revised Code.  All complaints except those by the commission shall be by affidavit made on personal knowledge,
subject to the penalties of perjury.  Complaints by the commission shall be by affidavit, based upon reasonable
cause to believe that a violation has occurred.
 (B)  The appropriate ethics commission shall investigate complaints, may investigate charges presented
to  it,  and  may  request  further  information,  including  the  specific  amount  of  income  from  a  source,  from  any

16

person filing with the commission a statement required by section 102.02 or 102.021 of the Revised Code, if the
information sought is directly relevant to a complaint or charges received by the commission pursuant to this
section.  This information is confidential, except that the commission, in its discretion, may share information
gathered  in  the  course  of  any  investigation  with,  or  disclose  the  information  to,  the  inspector  general,  any
appropriate prosecuting authority, any law enforcement agency, or any other appropriate ethics commission.  If
the accused person is a member of the public employees retirement board, state teachers retirement board, school
employees retirement board, board of trustees of the Ohio police and fire pension fund, or state highway patrol
retirement  board,  or  is  a  member  of  the  bureau  of  workers'  compensation  board  of  directors,  the  appropriate
ethics commission, in its discretion, also may share information gathered in the course of an investigation with,
or disclose the information to, the attorney general and the auditor of state.  The person so requested shall furnish
the information to the commission, unless within fifteen days from the date of the request the person files an
action for declaratory judgment challenging the legitimacy of the request in the court of common pleas of the
county  of  the  person's  residence,  the  person's  place  of  employment,  or  Franklin  county.    The  requested
information  need  not  be  furnished  to  the  commission  during  the  pendency  of  the  judicial  proceedings.
Proceedings  of  the  commission  in  connection  with  the  declaratory  judgment  action  shall  be  kept  confidential
except as otherwise provided by this section.  Before the commission proceeds to take any formal action against
a person who is the subject of an investigation based on charges presented to the commission, a complaint shall
be filed against the person.  If the commission finds that a complaint is not frivolous, and there is reasonable
cause to believe that the facts alleged in a complaint constitute a violation of section 102.02, 102.021, 102.03,
102.04, 102.07, 2921.42, or 2921.43 of the Revised Code, it shall hold a hearing.  If the commission does not so
find, it shall dismiss the complaint and notify the accused person in writing of the dismissal of the complaint.
The commission shall not make a report of its finding unless the accused person requests a report.  Upon the
request  of  the  accused  person,  the  commission  shall  make  a  public  report  of  its  finding.    The  person  against
whom the complaint is directed shall be given reasonable notice by certified mail of the date, time, and place of
the hearing and a statement of the charges and the law directly involved and shall be given the opportunity to be
represented by counsel, to have counsel appointed for the person if the person is unable to afford counsel without
undue  hardship,  to  examine  the  evidence  against  the  person,  to  produce  evidence  and  to  call  and  subpoena
witnesses  in  the  person's  defense,  to  confront  the  person's  accusers,  and  to  cross-examine  witnesses.    The
commission shall have a stenographic record made of the hearing.  The hearing shall be closed to the public.
 (C)(1)(a)  If, upon the basis of the hearing, the appropriate ethics commission finds by a preponderance
of  the  evidence  that  the  facts  alleged  in  the  complaint  are  true  and  constitute  a  violation  of  section  102.02,
102.021,  102.03,  102.04,  102.07,  2921.42,  or  2921.43  of  the  Revised  Code,  it  shall  report  its  findings  to  the
appropriate  prosecuting  authority  for  proceedings  in  prosecution  of  the  violation  and  to  the  appointing  or
employing authority of the accused.  If the accused person is a member of the public employees retirement board,
state teachers retirement board, school employees retirement board, board of trustees of the Ohio police and fire
pension fund, or state highway patrol retirement board, the commission also shall report its findings to the Ohio
retirement study council.
 (b)    If  the  Ohio  ethics  commission  reports  its  findings  to  the  appropriate  prosecuting  authority  under
division  (C)(1)(a)  of  this  section  and  the  prosecuting  authority  has  not  initiated  any  official  action  on  those
findings  within  ninety  days  after  receiving  the  commission's  report  of  them,  the  commission  may  publicly
comment  that  no  official  action  has  been  taken  on  its  findings,  except  that  the  commission  shall  make  no
comment in violation of the Rules of Criminal Procedure or about any indictment that has been sealed pursuant
to any law or those rules.  The commission shall make no comment regarding the merits of its findings.  As used
in division (C)(1)(b) of this section, "official action" means prosecution, closure after investigation, or grand jury
action resulting in a true bill of indictment or no true bill of indictment.
 (2)  If the appropriate ethics commission does not find by a preponderance of the evidence that the facts
alleged in the complaint are true and constitute a violation of section 102.02, 102.021, 102.03, 102.04, 102.07,
2921.42, or 2921.43 of the Revised Code or if the commission has not scheduled a hearing within ninety days
after the complaint is filed or has not finally disposed of the complaint within six months after it has been heard,
it shall dismiss the complaint and notify the accused person in writing of the dismissal of the complaint.  The
commission shall not make a report of its finding unless the accused person requests a report.  Upon the request
of the accused person, the commission shall make a public report of the finding, but in this case all evidence and
the record of the hearing shall remain confidential unless the accused person also requests that the evidence and

17

record be made public.  Upon request by the accused person, the commission shall make the evidence and the
record available for public inspection.
 (D)  The appropriate ethics commission, or a member of the commission, may administer oaths, and the
commission  may  issue  subpoenas  to  any  person  in  the  state  compelling  the  attendance  of  witnesses  and  the
production of relevant papers, books, accounts, and records.  The commission shall issue subpoenas to compel
the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents upon the request of an accused person.  Section
101.42 of the Revised Code shall govern the issuance of these subpoenas insofar as applicable.  Upon the refusal
of any person to obey a subpoena or to be sworn or to answer as a witness, the commission may apply to the
court  of  common  pleas  of  Franklin  county  under  section  2705.03  of  the  Revised  Code.    The  court  shall  hold
proceedings in accordance with Chapter 2705. of the Revised Code.  The commission or the accused person may
take the depositions of witnesses residing within or without the state in the same manner as prescribed by law
for the taking of depositions in civil actions in the court of common pleas.
 (E)  At least once each year, the Ohio ethics commission shall report on its activities of the immediately
preceding  year  to  the  majority  and  minority  leaders  of  the  senate  and  house  of  representatives  of  the  general
assembly.  The report shall indicate the total number of complaints received, initiated, and investigated by the
commission,  the  total  number  of  complaints  for  which  formal  hearings  were  held,  and  the  total  number  of
complaints for which formal prosecution was recommended or requested by the commission.  The report also
shall indicate the nature of the inappropriate conduct alleged in each complaint and the governmental entity with
which  any  employee  or  official  that  is  the  subject  of  a  complaint  was  employed  at  the  time  of  the  alleged
inappropriate conduct.
 (F)  All papers, records, affidavits, and documents upon any complaint, inquiry, or investigation relating
to the proceedings of the appropriate ethics commission shall be sealed and are private and confidential, except
as otherwise provided in this section and section 102.07 of the Revised Code.
 (G)(1)    When  a  complaint  or  charge  is  before  it,  the  Ohio  ethics  commission  or  the  appropriate
prosecuting authority, in consultation with the person filing the complaint or charge, the accused, and any other
person the commission or prosecuting authority considers necessary, may compromise or settle the complaint or
charge with the agreement of the accused.  The compromise or settlement may include mediation, restitution,
rescission of affected contracts, forfeiture of any benefits resulting from a violation or potential violation of law,
resignation of a public official or employee, or any other relief that is agreed upon between the commission or
prosecuting authority and the accused.
 (2)  Any settlement agreement entered into under division (G)(1) of this section shall be in writing and
be accompanied by a statement of the findings of the commission or prosecuting authority and the reasons for
entering into the agreement.  The commission or prosecuting authority shall retain the agreement and statement
in  the  commission's  or  prosecuting  authority's  office  and,  in  the  commission's  or  prosecuting  authority's
discretion, may make the agreement, the statement, and any supporting information public, unless the agreement
provides otherwise.
 (3)  If a settlement agreement is breached by the accused, the commission or prosecuting authority, in
the  commission's  or  prosecuting  authority's  discretion,  may  rescind  the  agreement  and  reinstitute  any
investigation, hearing, or prosecution of the accused.  No information obtained from the accused in reaching the
settlement  that  is  not  otherwise  discoverable  from  the  accused  shall  be  used  in  any  proceeding  before  the
commission or by the appropriate prosecuting authority in prosecuting the violation.  Notwithstanding any other
section of the Revised Code, if a settlement agreement is breached, any statute of limitations for a violation of
this chapter or section 2921.42 or 2921.43 of the Revised Code is tolled from the date the complaint or charge is
fil  ed until the date the settlement agreement is breached.

Section 102.07

 No member, employee, or agent of the Ohio ethics commission, board of commissioners on grievances
and discipline of the supreme court, or joint legislative ethics committee shall divulge any information or any
books,  papers,  or  documents  presented  to  the  commission,  joint  legislative  ethics  committee,  or  board  of
commissioners  on  grievances  and  discipline  without  the  consent,  in  writing,  of  the  appropriate  ethics
commission, unless such books, papers, or documents were presented at a public hearing, except as provided in
section 102.06 of the Revised Code.

18

 No person shall divulge information that appears on a disclosure statement and is required to be kept
confidential under division (B) of section 102.02 of the Revised Code.

Section 102.08*

* See also following version of this section and explanation after that version.

 (A)(1)    Subject  to  division  (A)(2)  of  this  section,  the  board  of  commissioners  on  grievances  and
discipline  of  the  supreme  court  and  the  house  and  senate  legislative  ethics  committees  may  recommend
legislation relating to ethics, conflicts of interest, and financial disclosure and shall render advisory opinions with
regard to questions concerning these matters for persons for whom it is the appropriate ethics commission.  When
the appropriate ethics commission renders an advisory opinion relating to a special set of circumstances involving
ethics,  conflict  of  interest,  or  financial  disclosure  under  Chapter  102.  or  section  2921.42  or  2921.43  of  the
Revised Code, the person to whom the opinion was directed or who was similarly situated may reasonably rely
upon the opinion and shall be immune from criminal prosecutions, civil suits, or actions for removal from his
office or position of employment for a violation of Chapter 102. or section 2921.42 or 2921.43 of the Revised
Code  based  on  facts  and  circumstances  covered  by  the  opinion,  if  the  opinion  states  there  is  no  violation  of
Chapter  102.  or  section  2921.42  or  2921.43  of  the  Revised  Code.    Except  as  otherwise  provided  in  division
(A)(2)  of  this  section,  the  appropriate  ethics  commission  shall  include  in  every  advisory  opinion  it  renders  a
statement  as  to  whether  the  set  of  circumstances  described  in  the  opinion  constitutes  a  violation  of  section
2921.42 or 2921.43 of the Revised Code.  The appropriate ethics commission shall provide a continuing program
of education and information concerning the provisions of Chapter 102. and sections 2921.42 and 2921.43 of the
Revised Code and other provisions of law pertaining to ethics, conflicts of interest, and financial disclosure.  As
used  in  division  (A)  of  this  section,  "appropriate  ethics  commission"  does  not  include  the  Ohio  ethics
commission.
 (2)  The board of commissioners on grievances and discipline of the supreme court shall issue advisory
opinions only in a manner consistent with Rule V of the Supreme Court Rules for the Government of the Bar of
Ohio.
 (B)  The Ohio ethics commission may recommend legislation relating to ethics, conflicts of interest, and
financial  disclosure  and  may  render  advice  with  regard  to  questions  concerning  these  matters  for  persons  for
whom it is the appropriate ethics commission.  When the Ohio ethics commission renders a written formal or
staff advisory opinion relating to a special set of circumstances involving ethics, conflict of interest, or financial
disclosure  under  Chapter  102.  or  section  2921.42  or  2921.43  of  the  Revised  Code,  the  person  to  whom  the
opinion was directed or who was similarly situated may reasonably rely upon the opinion and shall be immune
from criminal prosecutions, civil suits, or actions for removal from his office or position of employment for a
violation of Chapter 102. or section 2921.42 or 2921.43 of the Revised Code based on facts and circumstances
covered by the opinion, if the opinion states there is no violation of Chapter 102. or section 2921.42 or 2921.43
of  the  Revised  Code.    The  commission  shall  provide  a  continuing  program  of  education  and  information
concerning  the  provisions  of  Chapter  102.  and  sections  2921.42  and  2921.43  of  the  Revised  Code  and  other
provisions  of  law  pertaining  to  ethics,  conflicts  of  interest,  and  financial  disclosure.    [Am.  Sub.  H.B.  285,
effective 03-02-94.]

Section 102.08*

* See also preceding version of this section and explanation below.

 (A)    The  Ohio  ethics  commission,  the  board  of  commissioners  on  grievances  and  discipline  of  the
supreme court, and the joint legislative ethics committee may recommend legislation relating to ethics, conflicts
of  interest,  and  financial  disclosure,  and  render  advisory  opinions  with  regard  to  questions  concerning  these
matters for persons for whom it is the appropriate ethics commission.
 (B)  When the Ohio ethics commission or the board of commissioners on grievances and discipline of
the supreme court renders an advisory opinion relating to a special set of circumstances involving ethics, conflict
of interest, or financial disclosure under Chapter 102., section 2921.42, or section 2921.43 of the Revised Code,
the  person  to  whom  the  opinion  was  directed  or  who  was  similarly  situated  may  reasonably  rely  upon  such

19

opinion and shall be immune from criminal prosecutions, civil suits, or actions for removal from his office or
position of employment for a violation of Chapter 102., section 2921.42, or section 2921.43 of the Revised Code
based on facts and circumstances covered by the opinion, if the opinion states there is no violation of Chapter
102., section 2921.42, or section 2921.43 of the Revised Code.
 (C)    When  the  joint  legislative  ethics  committee  renders  an  advisory  opinion  that  has  been  publicly
sought  and  that  relates  to  a  special  set  of  circumstances  involving  ethics,  conflicts  of  interest,  or  financial
disclosure  under  Chapter  102.  or  section  2921.42  or  2921.43  of  the  Revised  Code,  the  person  to  whom  the
opinion was directed or who was similarly situated may reasonably rely upon such opinion and shall be immune
from criminal prosecutions, civil suits, or actions for removal from his office or position of employment for a
violation of Chapter 102. or section 2921.42 or 2921.43 of the Revised Code based on the facts and circumstances
covered  by  the  opinion,  if  the  opinion  states  that  there  is  no  violation  of  Chapter  102.  or  section  2921.42  or
2921.43 of the Revised Code.  When the joint legislative ethics committee renders an advisory opinion that has
been publicly sought, the advisory opinion is a public record available under section 149.43 of the Revised Code.
 (D)  When the joint legislative ethics committee renders a written opinion that has been privately sought
and  that  relates  to  a  special  set  of  circumstances  involving  ethics,  conflicts  of  interest,  or  financial  disclosure
under Chapter 102. or section 2921.42 or 2921.43 of the Revised Code, the written opinion does not have the
legal effect of an advisory opinion issued under division (C) of this section.  When the joint legislative ethics
committee renders a written opinion that has been privately sought, the written opinion is not a public record
available under section 149.43 of the Revised Code.  The proceedings of the legislative ethics committee relating
to  a  written  opinion  that  has  been  privately  sought  shall  be  closed  to  the  public  and  records  relating  to  these
proceedings are not public records available under section 149.43 of the Revised Code.
 The person to whom a written opinion is issued under this division may request the committee to issue
the written opinion as an advisory opinion.  Upon receiving such a request and with the approval of a majority
of the members of the committee, the committee may issue the written opinion as an advisory opinion.  If the
committee issues the written opinion as an advisory opinion, the advisory opinion has the same legal effect as an
advisory opinion issued under division (C) of this section and is a public record available under section 149.43
of the Revised Code.
 (E)    The  joint  legislative  ethics  committee  shall  issue  an  advisory  opinion  under  division  (C)  of  this
section or a written opinion under division (D) of this section, whether it is publicly or privately sought, only at
a meeting of the committee and only with the approval of a majority of the members of the committee.
 (F)  The appropriate ethics commission shall provide a continuing program of education and information
concerning  the  provisions  of  Chapter  102.    and  sections  2921.42  and  2921.43  of  the  Revised  Code  and  other
provisions  of  law  pertaining  to  ethics,  conflicts  of  interest,  and  financial  disclosure.    [Am.  Sub.  H.B.  492,
effective 05-12-94.]

*   R.C.  102.08  was  amended  by  Am.  Sub.  H.B.  285  (eff.  03-02-94)  and  Am.  Sub.  H.B.  492  (eff.  05-12-94).
Harmonization pursuant to R.C. 1.52 is in question.  Both versions are presented here.

Section 102.09

 (A)  The secretary of state and the county board of elections shall furnish, to each candidate for elective
office who is required to file a financial disclosure statement by section 102.02 of the Revised Code, a financial
disclosure  form,  and  shall  notify  the  appropriate  ethics  commission,  within  fifteen  days  of  the  name  of  the
candidate,  and  of  the  subsequent  withdrawal,  disqualification,  or  death  of  the  candidate.    The  candidate  shall
acknowledge receipt of the financial disclosure form in writing.
 (B)  The secretary of state and the county board of elections shall furnish to each person who is appointed
to fill a vacancy for an unexpired term in an elective office, and who is required to file a financial disclosure
statement by section 102.02 of the Revised Code, a financial disclosure form, and shall notify the appropriate
ethics commission within fifteen days of being notified by the appointing authority, of the name and position of
the public official and the date of appointment.  The person shall acknowledge receipt of the financial disclosure
form in writing.
 (C)  The public agency or appointing authority that employs, appoints, or promotes any public official
or  employee  who,  as  a  result  of  such  employment,  appointment,  or  promotion,  is  required  to  file  a  financial
disclosure  statement  by  section  102.02  of  the  Revised  Code,  shall,  within  fifteen  days  of  the  employment,

20

appointment, or promotion, furnish the public official or employee with a financial disclosure form, and shall
notify the appropriate ethics commission of the name and position of the public official or employee and the date
of employment, appointment, or promotion.  The public official or employee shall acknowledge receipt of the
financial disclosure form in writing.
 (D)  Within fifteen days after any public official or employee begins the performance of official duties,
the public agency with which the official or employee serves or the appointing authority shall furnish the official
or  employee  a  copy  of  Chapter  102.  and  section  2921.42  of  the  Revised  Code,  and  may  furnish  such  other
materials  as  the  appropriate  ethics  commission  prepares  for  distribution.    The  official  or  employee  shall
acknowledge their receipt in writing.  The requirements of this division do not apply at the time of reappointment
or reelection.

Section 102.99

 (A) Whoever violates division (C) of section 102.02 or division (C) of section 102.031
 of the Revised
Code is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
 (B)  Whoever  violates  division  (D)  of  section 102.02 or  section 102.021, 102.03, 102.04,  or 102.07 of
the Revised Code is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
 (C) In addition to the penalty provided in division (B) of this section, whoever violates division (M)(1),
(2), or (3) of section 102.03
 of the Revised Code forfeits the individual's office or employment.
 (D) In addition to the penalty provided in division (B) of this section, any person who violates division
(F) of section 102.03
 of the Revised Code is subject to the following:
 (1) The court may prohibit the person from participating in a public contract with any public agency in
this  state  for  a  period  of  two  years  if  recommended  by  the  agency  by  whom  the  offending  public  official  or
employee was employed.
 (2) The court may order the person to pay an additional fine equal to the amount of any thing of value
given in violation of division (F) of section 102.03
 of the Revised Code.
 (E) Upon application of the Ohio ethics commission, the court shall order a person who is convicted of
a violation of section 102.021, 102.03, or 102.04
 of the Revised Code to pay the costs incurred to investigate and
prosecute  the  case.  The  amount  ordered  under  this  division  shall  not  exceed  the  amount  a  person  unlawfully
secured,  solicited,  or  accepted;  the  amount  a  person  received  as  improper  compensation,  as  an  unlawful
honorarium,  or  from  the  unlawful  sale  of  goods  or  services;  or  the  amount  otherwise  applicable  under
section
102.021, 102.03, or 102.04 of the Revised Code. These costs are in addition to any other cost or penalty
provided in the Revised Code or any other provision of law.

21

CHAPTER 2921.

Section 2921.01 As used in sections 2921.01 to 2921.45 of the Revised Code:

(A) "Public official" means any elected or appointed officer, or employee, or agent of the state or any
political subdivision, whether in a temporary or permanent capacity, and includes, but is not limited to,
legislators, judges, and law enforcement officers. "Public official" does not include an employee, officer, or
governor-appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit corporation formed under section 187.01
of the Revised Code.
(B) "Public servant" means any of the following:
(1)  Any public official;
(2) Any person performing ad hoc a governmental function, including, but not limited to, a juror,
member of a temporary commission, master, arbitrator, advisor, or consultant;
(3) A person who is a candidate for public office, whether or not the person is elected or appointed to
the office for which the person is a candidate. A person is a candidate for purposes of this division if the person
has been nominated according to law for election or appointment to public office, or if the person has filed a
petition or petitions as required by law to have the person's name placed on the ballot in a primary, general, or
special election, or if the person campaigns as a write-in candidate in any primary, general, or special election.
"Public servant" does not include an employee, officer, or governor-appointed member of the board of
directors of the nonprofit corporation formed under section 187.01 of the Revised Code.
 (C) "Party official" means any person who holds an elective or appointive post in a political party in the
United  States  or  this  state,  by  virtue  of  which  the  person  directs,  conducts,  or  participates  in  directing  or
conducting party affairs at any level of responsibility.
 (D)  "Official proceeding" means any proceeding before a legislative, judicial, administrative, or other
governmental agency or official authorized to take evidence under oath and includes any proceeding before a
referee, hearing examiner, commissioner, notary, or other person taking testimony or a deposition in connection
with an official proceeding.
 (E)  "Detention" means arrest; confinement in any vehicle subsequent to an arrest; confinement in any
public or private facility for custody of persons charged with or convicted of crime in this state or another state
or under the laws of the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent child or unruly child in this state or
another state or under the laws of the United States; hospitalization, institutionalization, or confinement in any
public or private facility that is ordered pursuant to or under the authority of section 2945.37, 2945.371, 2945.38,
2945.39, 2945.40, 2945.401, or 2945.402 of the Revised Code; confinement in any vehicle for transportation to
or from any facility of any of those natures; detention for extradition or deportation; except as provided in this
division, supervision by any employee of any facility of any of those natures that is incidental to hospitalization,
institutionalization, or confinement in the facility but that occurs outside the facility; supervision by an employee
of the department of rehabilitation and correction of a person on any type of release from a state correctional
institution; or confinement in any vehicle, airplane, or place while being returned from outside of this state into
this state by a private person or entity, pursuant to a contract entered into under division (E) of section 311.29 of
the Revised Code or division (B) of section 5149.03 of the Revised Code.  For a person confined in a county jail
who participates in a county jail industry program pursuant to section 5147.30 of the Revised Code, "detention"
includes time spent at an assigned work site and going to and from the work site.
 (F)  "Detention facility" means any public or private place used for the confinement of a person charged
with or convicted of any crime in this state or another state or under the laws of the United States or alleged or
found to be a delinquent child or unruly child in this state or another state or under the laws of the United States.
 (G)  "Valuable thing or valuable benefit" includes, but is not limited to, a contribution.  This inclusion
does not indicate or imply that a contribution was not included in those terms before September 17, 1986.
 (H)  "Campaign committee," "contribution," "political action committee," "legislative campaign fund,"
"political party," and "political contributing entity" have the same meanings as in section 3517.01 of the Revised
Code.
(I) "Provider agreement" has the same meaning as in section 5164.01 of the Revised Code.

22

Sec. 2921.42.

(A) No public official shall knowingly do any of the following:
(1) Authorize, or employ the authority or influence of the public official's office to secure authorization
of any public contract in which the public official, a member of the public official's family, or any of the public
official's business associates has an interest;
(2) Authorize, or employ the authority or influence of the public official's office to secure the investment
of  public  funds  in  any  share,  bond,  mortgage,  or  other  security,  with  respect  to  which  the  public  official,  a
member of the public official's family, or any of the public official's business associates either has an interest,
is an underwriter, or receives any brokerage, origination, or servicing fees;
(3) During the public official's term of office or within one year thereafter, occupy any position of profit
in the prosecution of a public contract authorized by the public official or by a legislative body, commission, or
board  of  which  the  public  official  was  a  member  at  the  time  of  authorization,  unless  the  contract  was  let  by
competitive bidding to the lowest and best bidder;
(4) Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract entered into by or for the use of the
political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality with which the public official is connected;
(5) Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract that is not let by competitive bidding if
required by law and that involves more than one hundred fifty dollars.
(B)  In  the  absence  of  bribery  or  a  purpose  to  defraud,  a  public  official,  member  of  a  public  official's
family, or any of a public official's business associates shall not be considered as having an interest in a public
contract or the investment of public funds, if all of the following apply:
(1) The interest of that person is limited to owning or controlling shares of the corporation, or being a
creditor of the corporation or other organization, that is the contractor on the public contract involved, or that is
the issuer of the security in which public funds are invested;
(2) The shares owned or controlled by that person do not exceed five per cent of the outstanding shares
of  the  corporation,  and  the  amount  due  that  person  as  creditor  does  not  exceed  five  per  cent  of  the  total
indebtedness of the corporation or other organization;
(3) That person, prior to the time the public contract is entered into, files with the political subdivision
or governmental agency or instrumentality involved, an affidavit giving that person's exact status in connection
with the corporation or other organization.
(C)  This  section  does  not  apply  to  a  public  contract  in  which  a  public  official,  member  of  a  public
official's family, or one of a public official's business associates has an interest, when all of the following apply:
(1) The subject of the public contract is necessary supplies or services for the political subdivision or
governmental agency or instrumentality involved;
(2) The supplies or services are unobtainable elsewhere for the same or lower cost, or are being furnished
to the political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality as part of a continuing course of dealing
established  prior  to  the  public  official's  becoming  associated  with  the  political  subdivision  or  governmental
agency or instrumentality involved;
(3) The treatment accorded the political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality is either
preferential to or the same as that accorded other customers or clients in similar transactions;
(4) The entire transaction is conducted at arm's length, with full knowledge by the political subdivision
or governmental agency or instrumentality involved, of the interest of the public official, member of the public
official's family, or business associate, and the public official takes no part in the deliberations or decision of the
political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality with respect to the public contract.
(D) Division (A)(4) of this section does not prohibit participation by a public employee in any housing
program funded by public moneys if the public employee otherwise qualifies for the program and does not use
the authority or influence of the public employee's office or employment to secure benefits from the program
and if the moneys are to be used on the primary residence of the public employee. Such participation does not
constitute an unlawful interest in a public contract in violation of this section.
(E) Whoever violates this section is guilty of having an unlawful interest in a public contract. Violation
of division (A)(1) or (2) of this section is a felony of the fourth degree. Violation of division (A)(3), (4), or (5)
of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(F) It is not a violation of this section for a prosecuting attorney to appoint assistants and employees in
accordance  with  sections  309.06  and  2921.421  of  the  Revised  Code,  for  a  chief  legal  officer  of  a  municipal

23

corporation or an official designated as prosecutor in a municipal corporation to appoint assistants and employees
in accordance with sections 733.621 and 2921.421 of the Revised Code, or for a township law director appointed
under  section  504.15  of  the  Revised  Code  to  appoint  assistants  and  employees  in  accordance  with  sections
504.151 and 2921.421 of the Revised Code.
(G) This section does not apply to a public contract in which a township trustee in a township with a
population of five thousand or less in its unincorporated area, a member of the township trustee's family, or one
of the township trustee's business associates has an interest, if all of the following apply:
(1) The subject of the public contract is necessary supplies or services for the township and the amount
of the contract is less than five thousand dollars per year;
(2) The supplies or services are being furnished to the township as part of a continuing course of dealing
established before the township trustee held that office with the township;
(3)  The  treatment  accorded  the  township  is  either  preferential  to  or  the  same  as  that  accorded  other
customers or clients in similar transactions;
(4)The entire transaction is conducted with full knowledge by the township of the interest of the township
trustee, member of the township trustee's family, or the township trustee's business associate.
(H) Any public contract in which a public official, a member of the public official's family, or any of
the public official's business associates has an interest in violation of this section is void and unenforceable. Any
contract  securing  the  investment  of  public  funds  in  which  a  public  official,  a  member  of  the  public  official's
family,  or  any  of  the  public  official's  business  associates  has  an  interest,  is  an  underwriter,  or  receives  any
brokerage,  origination,  or  servicing  fees  and  that  was  entered  into in  violation  of  this  section  is  void  and
unenforceable.
(I) As used in this section:
(1) "Public contract" means any of the following:
(a) The purchase or acquisition, or a contract for the purchase or acquisition, of property or services by
or for the use of the state, any of its political subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either, including
the employment of an individual by the state, any of its political subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality
of either;
(b) A contract for the design, construction, alteration, repair, or maintenance of any public property.
(2) "Chief legal officer" has the same meaning as in section 733.621 of the Revised Code.

Sec. 2921.421

 (A)  As used in this section:
 (1)  "Chief legal officer" has the same meaning as in section 733.621 of the Revised Code.
 (2)  "Political subdivision" means a county, a municipal corporation, or a township that adopts a limited
home rule government under Chapter 504. of the Revised Code.
 (B)  A prosecuting attorney may appoint assistants and employees, except a member of the family of the
prosecuting attorney, in accordance with division (B) of section 309.06 of the Revised Code, a chief legal officer
of  a  municipal  corporation  or  an  official  designated  as  prosecutor  in  a  municipal  corporation  may  appoint
assistants  and  employees,  except  a  member  of  the  family  of  the  chief  legal  officer  or  official  designated  as
prosecutor,  in  accordance  with  section  733.621  of  the  Revised  Code,  and  a  township  law  director  appointed
under section 504.15 of the Revised Code may appoint assistants and employees, except a member of the family
of the township law director, in accordance with section 504.151 of the Revised Code, if all of the following
apply:
 (1)  The services to be furnished by the appointee or employee are necessary services for the political
subdivision or are authorized by the legislative authority, governing board, or other contracting authority of the
political subdivision.
 (2)  The treatment accorded the political subdivision is either preferential to or the same as that accorded
other  clients  or  customers  of  the  appointee  or  employee  in  similar  transactions,  or  the  legislative  authority,
governing board, or other contracting authority of the political subdivision, in its sole discretion, determines that
the  compensation  and  other  terms  of  appointment  or  employment  of  the  appointee  or  employee  are  fair  and
reasonable to the political subdivision.
 (3)  The appointment or employment is made after prior written disclosure to the legislative authority,
governing board, or other contracting authority of the political subdivision of the business relationship between

24

the prosecuting attorney, the chief legal officer or official designated as prosecutor in a municipal corporation,
or the township law director and the appointee or employee thereof.  In the case of a municipal corporation, the
disclosure may be made or evidenced in an ordinance, resolution, or other document that does either or both of
the following:
 (a)  Authorizes the furnishing of services as required under division (B)(1) of this section;
 (b)  Determines that the compensation and other terms of appointment or employment of the appointee
or employee are fair and reasonable to the political subdivision as required under division (B)(2) of this section.
 (4)  The prosecuting attorney, the elected chief legal officer, or the township law director does not receive
any distributive share or other portion, in whole or in part, of the earnings of the business associate, partner, or
employee paid by the political subdivision to the business associate, partner, or employee for services rendered
for the political subdivision.
 (C)    It  is  not  a  violation  of  this  section  or  of  section  102.03  or  2921.42  of  the  Revised  Code  for  the
legislative authority, the governing board, or other contracting authority of a political subdivision to engage the
services of any firm that practices the profession of law upon the terms approved by the legislative authority, the
governing board, or the contracting authority, or to designate any partner, officer, or employee of that firm as a
nonelected  public  official  or  employee  of  the  political  subdivision,  whether  the  public  office  or  position  of
employment is created by statute, charter, ordinance, resolution, or other legislative or administrative action.

Section 2921.43

 (A)  No public servant shall knowingly solicit or accept, and no person shall knowingly promise or give
to a public servant, either of the following:
 (1)    Any  compensation,  other  than  as  allowed  by  divisions  (G),  (H),  and  (I)  of  section  102.03  of  the
Revised Code or other provisions of law, to perform the public servant's official duties, to perform any other act
or service in the public servant's public capacity, for the general performance of the duties of the public servant's
public office or public employment, or as a supplement to the public servant's public compensation;
 (2)  Additional or greater fees or costs than are allowed by law to perform the public servant's official
duties.
 (B)    No  public  servant  for  the  public  servant's  own  personal  or  business  use,  and  no  person  for  the
person's own personal or business use or for the personal or business use of a public servant or party official,
shall solicit or accept anything of value in consideration of either of the following:
 (1)  Appointing or securing, maintaining, or renewing the appointment of any person to any public office,
employment, or agency;
 (2)  Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with respect to compensation, duties,
placement, location, promotion, or other material aspects of employment.
 (C)    No  person  for  the  benefit  of  a  political  party,  campaign  committee,  legislative  campaign  fund,
political action committee, or political contributing entity shall coerce any contribution in consideration of either
of the following:
 (1)  Appointing or securing, maintaining, or renewing the appointment of any person to any public office,
employment, or agency;
 (2)  Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with respect to compensation, duties,
placement, location, promotion, or other material aspects of employment.
 (D)  Whoever violates this section is guilty of soliciting improper compensation, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
 (E)    A  public  servant  who  is  convicted  of  a  violation  of  this  section  is  disqualified  from  holding  any
public office, employment, or position of trust in this state for a period of seven years from the date of conviction.
 (F)    Divisions  (A),  (B),  and  (C)  of  this  section  do  not  prohibit  a  person  from  making  voluntary
contributions to a political party, campaign committee, legislative campaign fund, political action committee, or
political contributing entity or prohibit a political party, campaign committee, legislative campaign fund, political
action committee, or political contributing entity, from accepting voluntary contributions.

25

FOR  MORE  INFORMATION,  OR  ADDITIONAL  MATERIALS  ON  THE  OHIO  ETHICS
LAW, PLEASE CONTACT:

OHIO ETHICS COMMISSION
William Green Building
30 West Spring St., L3
Columbus, Ohio 43215-2256
Phone:  (614) 466-7090
Fax:  (614) 466-8368
www.ethics.ohio.gov

Revised January 2026