--- PAGE 1 ---
CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 1
CITY OF CLEVELAND
HUMAN RESOURCES POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL
Section B - General Policies and Procedures
The General Procedures Section of the Manual is designed to provide support and
assistance to City Departments and employees in coordinating Human Resources
programs, processes and services.
 Table of Contents
Policy
Number
Policy, Procedure and/or Forms
Page
Number
B-1 Employee Probationary Period 2
B-2 Employment in Addition to City Employment 4
B-3 Employment Status 7
B-4 Exit Interview Procedure 9
B-5 Flex Time, Core Hours, Alternative Work Schedule 13
B-6 Injury Pay Program 17
B-7 Interruption of Working Hours During an Emergency 24
B-8 Lay-off and Recall Process 26
B-9 Nepotism Policy 29
B-10 Office of Workers' Compensation 32
B-11 Overtime/Compensatory Time Policy 36
B-12 Pre-Employment Procedures 40
B-13 Procedure for Inter Departmental/Divisional Transfers 45
B-14 Public Records Policy 46
B-15 Separation From City Employment 48
B-16 Commuter Policy 51
B-17 Plus Adjustment Pay Policy 57
B-18 Employee Assistance Program Policy 64
B-19 Fair Hiring Policy 66

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
General Policies
B-1
Page | 2

EMPLOYEE PROBATIONARY PERIOD

I. Probationary Period

A. The probationary period provided by Section 131 of the Charter of
the City of Cleveland for some employees is 120 calendar days from
the effective date of hire, promotion or appointment to the affected
position subject to the following exceptions:

1. The applicable collective bargaining agreement supersedes this
policy and may provide for a different duration for the
probationary period.

2. The Civil Service Commission, where the good of the service
requires, fixes the duration of the probationary period for
individual classifications at six calendar months; but such
action must be taken at the time the examination for such
classification is announced.

3. Probationary employees will be regularly evaluated and are
subject to probationary termination at any time if performance
does not merit continued employment.

4. The Civil Service Commission may extend an employee's initial
120 day probationary period for an additional period not to
exceed 60 calendar days where an extension is necessary for
adequate evaluation of that employees' performance. Any
extension of a bargaining unit employee's probationary period
must be done with mutual agreement between the collective
bargaining unit and the City, and must be agreed to prior to
expiration of the current probationary period.

B. The probationary period shall be utilized for the following:

1. Closely observing the employee's progress as the employee is
assigned responsibilities consistent with the job classification.

2. Securing the most effective adjustment of the new employee
to his or her position

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 3

3. Documenting the employee's ability to meet the requirements
of the new position.

C. No appointment or promotion is final until the appointee has
satisfactorily served his or her probationary period.

D. Please see Civil Service rule 6.80 - 6.84 or applicable collective
bargaining agreement for further information on probationary period.

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Director of Personnel & HR
_
Title
March 17, 2008

Date

B-1

Signature

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 4

EMPLOYMENT IN ADDITION TO CITY EMPLOYMENT

Employment in Addition to City Employment

A. An employee who desires secondary employment must secure written authorization
from the appointing authority, the department director, and the Director of Human
Resources (see attached form). Secondary employment is defined as an occupation,
vocation, profession, trade, or business other than City employment for which
remuneration is received and which includes any work engaged in for profit
including self-employment. The authorization will be effective until January 31 of the
year following the year it is granted, and must be requested annually thereafter.
Discipline/Dismissal can result in failure to obtain authorization.

B. All requests for secondary employment will be reviewed and approved to avoid both
impropriety and the appearance of impropriety, avoiding improper influences from
business, family, position, party or person. Secondary Employment evaluations shall
avoid activities that would impugn the dignity of the City. Please see City of
Cleveland Policy C-21 (Ethics Policy).

C. The appointing authority must determine if the secondary employment involves a
conflict with the employee's City position and/or operational needs of the
department/division. The appointing authority will not authorize any employment
whose nature or hours worked are such that job performance with the City is
adversely affected. Examples include employment that could tire or reduce efficiency
of personnel while on City payroll or that results in visits or telephone calls or other
distractions while on the job or results in time off from the employee's City job. If
any of the above conditions exist, they should be documented, and the employee
will be subject to the City's progressive discipline policy. The appointing authority
has the right to revoke the authorization at any time based upon the operational
needs of the department/division.

D. If an employee is unable to work due to illness or injury, the employee is required to
advise the appointing authority if the employee intends to work the secondary job
during the period that the employee is incapacitated. Employees who participate in
the Injury Pay Program are not permitted to work secondary employment.

E. The City will not defend personnel in lawsuits brought against them as a result of
actions taken or not taken during secondary employment. Therefore, it is
recommended that City employees have an understanding with the secondary
employer that they be covered by that employer's general comprehensive liability
insurance, if applicable.
B-2

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
B-2
Page | 5

F. The following stipulation is required to be signed on all requests for authorization for
secondary employment:
1. I am aware that in my secondary employment, the City of Cleveland has
no responsibility for my actions or any liability resulting there from, and
that I must personally assume that responsibility or obtain other liability
insurance.
2. I further understand that if my City employment is adversely affected, my
authorization for secondary employment will be revoked. I am also aware
that my appointing authority may revoke this authorization at any time
based on the operational needs of the department/division.
3. I authorize the Secondary Employer, referenced above, to release to the
City of Cleveland any and all records, documents, and/or other data
compilations regarding the specific days on which I will perform or
performed work for the Secondary Employer and the exact hours of work I
will perform or performed for the Secondary Employer (i.e., starting time,
ending time, total number of hours worked, etc.). The authorization covers
all information regardless of how the Secondary Employer maintains the
information in the ordinary course of business (e.g., paper, electronic or
other data compilation format). The request may include, but is not limited
to, the production of the following types of records, documents, or data
compilations utilized by the Secondary Employer to record the days and
hours of work I will perform or performed for the Secondary Employer:
payroll records, work schedules, time cards, proof of Bureau of Workers'
Compensation certification, etc.

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Director of Human Resources
_
Title
March 26, 2018

Date

Signature

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 6

AUTHORIZATION FOR SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT -- REQUEST FORM

NAME   CLASSIFICATION
EMPLOYEE ID #:  DEPARTMENT   DIVISION

SECONDARY EMPLOYER NAME/ADDRESS/PHONE NUMBER

JOB TITLE

TYPES OF DUTIES PERFORMED

DAYS TO BE WORKED BASED ON A 14 DAY SCHEDULE

HOURS TO BE WORKED:
I am aware that in my secondary employment, the City of Cleveland has no responsibility for my actions
or any liability resulting there from, and that I must personally assume that responsibility or obtain other
liability insurance.
I  further  understand  that  if  my  City  employment  is  adversely  affected,  my  authorization  for  secondary
employment will be revoked. I am also aware that my appointing authority may revoke this authorization
at any time based on the operational needs of the department/division.
I  authorize  the  Secondary  Employer,  referenced  above,  to  release  to  the  City  of  Cleveland  any  and  all
records, documents, and/or other data compilations regarding the specific days on which I will perform or
performed work for the Secondary Employer and the exact hours of work I will perform or performed for
the  Secondary  Employer  (i.e.,  starting  time,  ending  time,  total  number  of  hours  worked,  etc.). The
authorization covers all information regardless of how the Secondary Employer maintains the information in
the ordinary course of business (e.g., paper, electronic or other data compilation format). The request may
include,  but  is  not  limited  to,  the  production  of  the  following  types  of  records,  documents,  or  data
compilations  utilized by the Secondary Employer to record the days and hours of work I will perform or
performed  for the Secondary Employer: payroll records, work schedules, time cards, proof  of  Bureau  of
Workers' Compensation certification, etc.

Employee Signature Date

AUTHORIZED BY:

APPOINTING AUTHORITY DATE

DEPARTMENT DIRECTOR DATE

DIRECTOR OF HUMAN RESOURCES DATE

EXPIRES JANUARY 31,   (Note: Approval must be renewed annually)

B-2-1

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
B-3
Page | 7

EMPLOYMENT STATUS

A. A full-time employee is defined as an employee who is regularly scheduled to
work the normal working hours of the department or division to which he or she
is assigned. Union agreements generally define the normal work week for full-
time employees 40 hours per week of work in five, eight hour days.

B. The following are not considered full-time employees:

1. Part-time Employees: A part-time employee is defined as an employee
who is regularly scheduled to work less than the normal working hours of
a Department or Division. Each part-time employee must sign an
acknowledgment form that he or she understands that he or she is not
entitled to benefits reserved to full-time employees, unless otherwise
specified by ordinance or contract. (See form B-3-1) The employee's
department/division is responsible for having the employee sign this
acknowledgment form. The department/division is also responsible for
forwarding a copy of the authorization to the Department of Human
Resources.

2. Seasonal Employees: A seasonal employee who works full-time during
a specific season or period of the year performing some work or activity
limited to that season or period of the year.

3. Temporary 60-Day Transitory, Temporary 30-Day Emergency
Employee or Part-Time: With the consent of the Civil Service
Commission, persons may be temporarily employed for transitory work,
but such employment shall not continue for more than 60 calendar days.
When there is an eligible list in existence for a title, the list must be used
for selecting a 60 calendar day transitory hire. With the consent of the
Civil Service Commission, when an emergency arises, persons may be
temporarily employed during the period of the emergency, but not for
longer than 30 calendar days. When there is an eligible list, candidates
from the list must be considered first.

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Director of Personnel & HR
_
Title
March 17, 2008

Date

Signature

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
B-3-1
Page | 8

NON-FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE ACKNOWLEDGMENT FORM

I  understand  that  I  am  a  part-time/seasonal/temporary  transitory  or  temporary
emergency employee who is scheduled to work less than a full-time employee. Therefore,
I  realize  that  I  am  not  entitled  to  participate  in  the  City's  employee  benefits  program
unless the Codified Ordinances of the City of Cleveland so authorize.

Employee Signature Department/Division Signature

Employee Identification Number

Employee Printed Name Department/Division Printed Name

Date Date

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 9
B-4

EXIT INTERVIEW PROCEDURE

Exit Interview

A. Normally, no later than the employee's last working day, the employee,
upon separation from City employment by way of layoff, resignation,
retirement, discharge or termination, must be given an exit interview by
an appropriate member of the employee's department/division staff as
designated by the director/commissioner.

1. In the event of a resignation, the employee is encouraged to
submit a written letter of resignation (preferably describing the
circumstances and reasons leading to the resignation to the
appointing authority, with a copy to the Department of Human
Resources).

2. During the interview, the employee will be advised of the following:

a. C.O.B.R.A. rights (if applicable)

b. The option to convert life insurance

c. The option to receive a refund of the employee's portion of
O.P.E.R.S. contributions

d. A confirmation of sick leave balance, unused vacation and
pro rated vacation

B. The employee will be responsible for returning all City property such as
City identification cards, keys, parking cards, badges, uniforms, radios,
pagers, cellular phones and any other City property.

C. If any City property has been lost or damaged, the cost of replacing such
property may be deducted from the employee's final paycheck or the final
paycheck may be withheld until all such items have been returned.

D. An exit interview checklist will be completed and must include the
employee's permanent mailing address (see Form B-4-1). If this address
is different from the current address, the P.I.D. should reflect the change.

E. This exit interview check list will be signed and dated by the employee
and the designated City of Cleveland agent and placed in the employee's
personnel file.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 10

F. If the employee is unable to attend the exit interview or if the employee is
deceased, a notation should be made on the exit form.

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Director of Personnel & HR
_
Title
March 17, 2008

Date

B-4

Signature

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
B-4-1
Page | 11

EXIT INTERVIEW CHECKLIST (2- Pages)
For Employees Separating From City Employment

EMPLOYEE NAME DEPARTMENT/DIVISION

EMPLOYEE IDENTIFICATION NUMBER

CURRENT PERMANENT ADDRESS

ITEM DESCRIPTION/DATE RECEIVED
1. CITY OF CLEVELAND I.D. CARD
( / / )
2. PETTY CASH FUNDS RECEIPT
( / / )
3. CITY VEHICLE
( / / )
4. KEYS TO CITY VEHICLE
( / / )
5. PARKING KEY CARD
( / / )
6. FUEL KEY CARD
( / / )
7. KRONOS KEY CARD
( / / )
8. OTHER KEY CARD
( / / )
9. DIVISION I.D. CARD
( / / )
10. CITY PROPERTY KEYS
( / / )
11. CITY TOOLS
( / / )
12. OFFICE SUPPLIES & EQUIPMENT
( / / )
13. UNIFORM
( / / )
14. RADIO
( / / )

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 12
B-4-1

EXIT INTERVIEW CHECKLIST (2- Pages)

15. WALKIE TALKIE
( / / )

16. PAGER
( / / )
17. CELLULAR PHONE
( / / )
18. COBRA ELECTION FORM/REPORT OF COBRA QUALIFYING EVENT
( / / )
19. OPTION TO CONVERT LIFE INSURANCE
( / / )
20. OPTION TO RECEIVE REFUND OF P.E.R.S.
( / / )
21. CONFIRMATION OF TOTAL SICK LEAVE BALANCE  HRS.
22. CONFIRMATION OF UNUSED VACATION  HRS.
23. CONFIRMATION OF PRO RATED VACATION  HRS.
24. CONFIRMATION OF OVERTIME/COMP TIME BALANCE  HRS.
25. OTHER: WELLNESS WORKS RISER DESK (if received)
( / / )
26. OTHER:
( / / )

Why have you chosen to leave your position with the City of Cleveland?

What, if any, action should/could the City of Cleveland taken to retain you?

SIGNATURES

EMPLOYEE'S SIGNATURE DATE

EMPLOYEE IDENTIFICATION NUMBER

PREPARED BY DATE

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 13 B-5

FLEX TIME, CORE HOURS, ALTERNATIVE WORK SCHEDULE

I. An appointing authority may establish flex time, core hours, and/or any other
schedule that may be necessary for the operation of the unit, consistent with
this policy and with the approval of the affected Director.

A. Flex time provides an alternative to a typical 8:00am to 5:00pm
work day during the standard five-day work week. It is an arrangement
that allows employees to set their own schedule within limits.

B. Core hours represent the time period during the work day that is within
the tour of duty during which an employee with a flexible work schedule is
required to be present for work.

1. A flexible schedule is prearranged and fixed within the core
hours. Employees are required to adhere to the flexible work
schedule unless deviation from that schedule is approved by the
appointing authority or designee.

2. The normal work week for regular full-time employees shall be forty
(40) hours of work in five (5) eight (8) hour days (The City reserves
the right, as operational needs and conditions require, to establish
and change hours of work, shifts and schedules of hours.).

All employees who work a regular work day shall be allowed not less
than thirty (30) uninterrupted minutes for a scheduled lunch period,
except  for  other  schedules  mutually  agreed  upon  by  the  Appointing
Authority (Employees are not permitted to use their lunch hour at the
beginning or end of a work-day to show-up to work late or leave early).

3. Any employee on an alternative work schedule may not use their
lunch hour adjacent to the beginning or end of their work-day.

4. All employees who work a regular work day shall be allowed two (2)
fifteen (15) minute rest periods on each shift, each work day. The rest
periods, to the extent practicable, will be scheduled during the middle
two  (2)  hours  of  each  one-half  (1/2)  shift  but  they  may  not  be
scheduled immediately before or after the meal period or at the start
or  the  end  of  the  shift,  except  for  schedules  agreed  upon  with  the
Appointing Authority. Further, fifteen (15) minute breaks are not
allowed to be used back-to-back to create one larger break.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies

C. Current provisions regarding hours as established in collective
bargaining agreements must be adhered to. If a change is desired, it
must be discussed with the affected union through the Department of
Human Resources, Office of Labor Relations. Changes to work hours of
bargaining unit employees must be handled through Labor Relations.

D. Alternative schedules are for specific lengths of time and cannot be
changed unilaterally by the employee without express written permission
from the appointing authority 24 hours in advance of any change or to
avoid being tardy or AWOL.

II. An alternative work schedule is a regular work schedule that is not based
on the standard five-day work week.

A. An appointing authority, with the approval of the affected director, may
propose an alternative work schedule for an individual employee or group
of employees based on operational needs or pursuant to employee
request as specified below.

B. An alternative work schedule may consist of a 40-hour work week spread
over a period of four to seven days in the employee's work week.

C. Approval of alternative work week

1. An appointing authority's proposal for an alternative work week must
demonstrate that the schedule will provide one or more of the
following benefits to the department/division

a. Reduction in overtime within a defined work unit.

b. Improved customer service through expansion of work hours
or enhanced staff coverage.

c. Increased opportunities for employee training or technology
upgrades.

2. An appointing authority's proposal for an alternative work week must
be approved in writing by the affected department director, the
Director of Human Resources and the Cluster Chief.

Page | 14
3. An individual non bargaining unit employee may request an
alternative work schedule based on personal need. The employee
must submit a written request with acceptable documentation to
B-5

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
B-5
Page | 15

his/her appointing authority that explains the personal need.

4. Guidelines for Employee Request

a. The employee's request may be necessitated by a
temporary or on-going medical situation covered by
the Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA).

b. The employee's request may describe other good
cause related to child care or similar non-medical
issue.

5. Guidelines for Approval of Employee Request

a. The appointing authority will review the employee
request with respect to
i. Impact on Overtime
ii. Employee's Current Performance
iii. Employee's Attendance Record
iv. Impact on operations

b. Approval of an employee's request for alternative work
schedule must be in writing and signed by the
employee and the appointing authority with written
approval of the affected director and the Director of
Human Resources.

c. Prior to approval, the affected director will review
the request with the executive assistant over the
department.

d. Approval of an employee request for an alternative
work schedule may be withdrawn at any time with
reasonable notice to the employee.

e. Flex time and alternative schedules are for specific
lengths of time and cannot be changed unilaterally by
an employee without express written permission from
the appointing authority 24 hours in advance of any
change. Violators can be subject to being charged
with being AWOL.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 16

6. Benefit Time Associated with Alternative Work Schedule

a. All proposals for an alternative work schedule must
specifically acknowledge that each employee's annual
personal day benefit is limited to 16 hours

b. All proposals for an alternative work schedule must
limit designated holidays to 8 hours of holiday pay.

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Director of Human Resources

Title
March 26, 2018

Date

B-5

Signature

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 17
B-6

CITY OF CLEVELAND INJURY PAY PROGRAM

City employees injured in the course of their employment where the injury or
occupational disease is compensable under the Workers' Compensation Laws of the
State of Ohio are eligible to participate in the City's Injury Leave Pay Program
("Program") as defined below.
Benefits to the Program
A. Injured employees are eligible to receive their regular pay and full benefits for up
to sixty-calendar days (60) from the date of injury, in lieu of receiving
compensation from the Bureau of Workers' Compensation (BWC). By receiving
regular pay, employees will continue to contribute to retirement, deferred
compensation, medical insurance, or any other type of payroll benefit that would
normally be in effect for that employee.

B. In addition, this Program eliminates any lag time that may occur between the
time of injury and the time that the injured worker is actually compensated for
time off by BWC.
Participation
A. All City employees covered by a collective bargaining agreement with language
establishing an Injury Pay Program are eligible to participate in this program.

B. Participation in the Program is the employee's option. The employee must
decide whether to participate in the program at the time the injury is reported.
As a condition of eligibility for the program, an employee must report a work
related illness/injury to the appropriate managerial authority within twenty-four
(24) hours that the injury/illness occurred.
Forms and Acknowledgement
A. If the employee chooses to participate in the Program, he/she must complete the
City of Cleveland Injury Leave Form and forward it to his/her supervisor or
payroll representative. This form acknowledges that employee has received,
understands, and agrees to comply with the provisions of the Program.

B. The employee must complete the Employee Report of Workplace Accident Form,
EI-4/A.C. 28 and forward it to his/her supervisor. The supervisor must complete
the Supervisor's Report of Workplace Accident, EAC-3. Upon completion, each of
these forms should be forwarded to Employee's Accident Control.

C. When the employee seeks medical treatment, he/she must complete the Bureau
of Workers' Compensation's First Report of Injury (FROI) application. The

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies

Managed Care Organization will forward a copy of this to Employees' Accident
Control.
Eligibility
A. Employees' Accident Control reviews the injury information to determine whether
to certify or reject the claim. If the claim is certified, the employee will be eligible
to participate in the Program. If the claim is rejected, the employee will not be
eligible to participate in the Program.

B. Only claims with an injury date on or after 1-1-2002 are eligible to participate in
this Program. Employees with an injury date prior to 1-1-2002 are not eligible to
participate in this Program, as it does not apply retroactively to claims with injury
dates that pre-date 1-1-2002.

C. An employee may be eligible to participate in the Program more than once if
multiple dates of injury are involved. For example, an employee suffers a broken
arm and misses a total of 38 days. He returns to work and two weeks later
sprains his back. The back sprain would be considered a new claim, and the
employee would be entitled to all the benefits of the Program for the new claim.
Medical Treatment
A. Employees who participate in this Program must select a Physician of Record
(POR) from the panel of physicians selected by the City. A physician from this
panel must prescribe all medical treatment for the work related injury. If an
employee requires specialized treatment from a physician that is not listed on the
panel, the Physician of Record will make a referral to a specialist.

B. Any employee who sustains a life-threatening injury may be treated at any
medical treatment facility to which emergency medical personnel transport the
employee. Employees are encouraged to use the City's preferred emergency
care providers. However, once the employee's condition is stabilized, he/she
must select a Physician of Record from the City's panel in order to participate in
the Program.

C. An employee who requires non-life-threatening emergency medical treatment
and wishes to participate in the Program may seek treatment at any BWC
certified emergency facility. If the employee requires follow up treatment, he/she
must select a Physician of Record from the City's panel to receive Program
benefits.

D. Injured employees who choose to be evaluated by a physician that is not listed
on the panel may do so. However, they will not be eligible for any benefits
under this Program.

Page | 18
B-6

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 19
B-6

E. The treating physician must supply written documentation in order for the
employee to receive paid injury leave. The preferred form is BWC's Medco-14,
Physician's Report of Work Ability. The physician must supply either an actual or
estimated return to work date. The employee will be placed in injury pay leave
status until he/she returns to work.

F. Any employee who does not fully cooperate with the mandates of the Program
and the treating physician's recommendations, including treatment, medication,
therapy, vocational rehabilitation and/or transitional work assignment will be
dropped from the program immediately and will forfeit any future claim to
Program benefits.
Participating Physicians and Medical Facilities
A. The City has carefully selected a panel of medical providers to ensure quality
care of our injured employees. All of the treatment facilities and physicians on
the panel are BWC certified and highly credentialed. In addition, the panel
provided lists a variety of medical facilities and physicians that are geographically
convenient for our employees to utilize.

B. The Director of Human Resources, Employees' Accident Control Manager, Risk
Manager, and Law Department designee will approve the medical providers listed
on the panel. The panel of participating medical providers will be updated as
needed to allow the addition or deletion of participating medical facilities and
physicians.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
B-6
Page | 20

Exhaustion of Program Benefits
A. If the employee is unable to return to work upon expiration of the paid injury
leave granted, the employee may elect, in writing, to use accumulated
sick leave or he/she may elect to seek payment under applicable provisions of
the Workers' Compensation Act. The employee is responsible for completing and
filing any and all forms that may be required by BWC.

B. If an employee exhausts the sixty-day (60) allotment and is receiving lost time
benefits through the BWC, the employee will be placed in an unpaid medical
leave status.
Intermittent Injury Leave
A. An employee may be eligible to participate in the Program and be paid Injury
Leave intermittently. For example, an employee is injured and misses 10 days
from work. He returns to work and after two days finds he cannot perform job
tasks. The employee would remain eligible to participate in the Program if the
Physician of Record supplies appropriate medical documentation that the
employee is disabled from employment. The two days that the employee
returned to work would not be counted in the sixty-day (60) calculation.
Overtime
Employees who participate in the Program will not be eligible to collect overtime pay.
Employees will only be paid for their regularly scheduled hours during their period of
disability, regardless of whether overtime has been offered in their Department.
Disallowed Claims
If an employee is granted Injury Pay and the claim is later disallowed by BWC, the
Injury Pay must be credited. The employee can elect to use sick, vacation, personal, or
comp time to cover the period of time that he/she was paid. If the employee does not
have enough sick or vacation time to cover this period, payment will be absorbed out of
future earnings.
Opting out of the Program
A. If an employee initially chooses not to participate in the Program, he/she cannot
opt back into the program. The decision to participate must be made at the time
of the initial injury. The employee may decide to opt out of the Program at any
time.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
B-6
Page | 21

B. If an employee decides to opt out of the Program, the employee may elect, in
writing, to use accumulated sick leave or he/she may elect to seek payment
under applicable provisions of the Workers' Compensation Act.

C. Again, the employee is responsible for completing and filing any and all forms
that may be required by BWC. If the employee seeks payment from BWC,
he/she should be placed in an unpaid medical leave status. The attendance
record does not need to be changed if the employee opts out of the Program.
Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA)
Employees off due to work-related injury will be considered to be using FMLA while they
are participating in the Program, the same as they would if they were receiving
Workers' Compensation benefits.
Return to Work/Transitional Work
A. The Program physician will determine when the employee may return to work
full duty or if transitional work is appropriate.

B. Transitional work assignments will be identified where applicable and the
Physician of Record has released the employee to participate in modified work
duties within his/her restrictions. A comprehensive Transitional Work policy has
been developed and approved which addresses all of the rules and guidelines
pertaining to overtime and working outside an employee's normal classification.
Any Division in need of a job analysis for Transitional Work can obtain this
information working with Office of Workers' Compensation and/or VocRehab1.

C. Refusal to participate in Transitional Work will result in forfeiture of benefits
under the Program.

Secondary Duty
All employees who participate in the program are prohibited from any type of secondary
duty employment.
False or Fraudulent Claims
In the event that the City finds that an employee who has received or is receiving paid
injury leave has filed a false or misleading claim, has worked in violation of

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
B-6
Page | 22

his/her medical restrictions, or is working in violation of his/her medical restrictions, the
City reserves the following rights:

a. The right to discharge or otherwise discipline the employee;
b. The right to recoup the full worth of all wage and/or benefit payments
rendered to the employee;
c. Where lawful, the right to seek civil damages from or criminal prosecution
of the employee.

Program Modifications
The City reserves the right to modify the program. The Program will not be modified
without prior discussion with the Union.

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Signature
Director of Personnel & HR

Title
March 17, 2008

Date

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
B-6-1
Page | 23

(SAMPLE) Injury Pay Program Leave Form
Name:
Date: Home Address:
Home phone: Work phone:
Department/Division: Job classification:
Date of injury: Union (if applicable):
SSN: Employee ID #:
Supervisor's Name: Supervisor's phone:
I have received a copy of the City of Cleveland's Injury Pay Leave Program (the Program) and have carefully
read  and  fully  understand  all  the  provisions  of  the  Program. My  signature  on  this  form  confirms  my
agreement to comply with all terms and conditions of the Program and confirms my understanding that if
I violate any provision or provisions of the Program, the City may exercise its right to dismiss me from the
Program immediately. I also understand that in the event that I am dismissed from the Program I will
immediately forfeit any future benefits under the Program.

I understand that I am prohibited from engaging in any type of secondary employment while
participating in the Program.
❑ I wish to participate in the program

❑ I do not wish to participate in the program

Employee's Signature Date Appointing Authority Signature Date

For Office Use Only - Do Not Complete This Section

❑ Injury Pay has been approved
❑ Injury Pay has not been approved: please check all that apply

Last Date Worked (LDW)
From:  / /
Return to Work (RTW)
Estimated Date:   /  /
Actual Date:  / /
Upon completion, fax this form to 664.4253
IPP Form is not complete
Injury claim before 1/1/02
Doctor not on preferred list
Not certified BWC claim
Secondary duty employment
Written documentation absent
Employee not covered by collective bargaining
Injury not reported within 24 hrs of occurrence
Actual/estimated RTW date absent on MEDCO-14
 Initially opted out of program
 Injured worker does not cooperate with doctor's recommendation, transitional work plan, medication, rehab, etc.
OWC/IPP

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
B-7
Page | 24

INTERRUPTION OF WORKING HOURS
DURING AN EMERGENCY

II. Policy Statement--It is the policy of the City of Cleveland that employees will
be notified as soon as possible concerning emergency conditions that require
deviation from normal work schedules.

III. Initial Determination of Emergency
A. The initial determination of whether conditions exist to designate a
situation as an emergency is made by the Mayor or the Mayor's
designee.
B. "Conditions" that constitute an emergency include but are not limited to
1. Weather Conditions
2. Public Health Alert
3. Public Safety Related Threat and or
4. Homeland Security Related Threat

IV. Designation of Essential Personnel
A. The Mayor or the Mayor's designee will determine departments, classifications
and/or employees who are essential personnel and who, as essential
personnel, are required to report for duty during the designated emergency.
B. The Mayor or the Mayor's designee will determine the status of non-essential
personnel who are not required to report for duty or who are not required to
observe usual work routines during a designated emergency.

IV. Notice of Emergency Reporting Procedures
A. The Mayor or the Mayor's designee will notify employees concerning the
responsibility to report to work during the emergency through the
following channels of communication.
1. City of Cleveland e-mail to all Chiefs and Appointing Authorities
2. Message to area radio and television stations via the Mayor's
press office
3. Recorded message on City Hall switchboard
4. Reverse 911 System

B. The duration of the emergency designation is to be one work day unless
more specific duration is given when the emergency is declared.

V. Lifting of Emergency Designation-Authority to lift the designation of
"Emergency" rests with the Mayor or the Mayor's designee.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 25

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Director of Personnel & HR
_
Title
March 17, 2008

Date

B-7

Signature

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
B-8
Page | 26

LAY-OFF AND RECALL PROCESS

I. Lay-Off Policy

A. Lay-off is defined as separation from City employment due to lack of work
or lack of funds.

B. Lay-off does not include a disciplinary suspension pending discharge,
resignation, termination due to failure of a Civil Service examination or
score too low to be appointed or discharge for any other reason in
accordance with Rule 9.00 of the Civil Service Rules and City Charter
Section 131.

C. Each lay-off list must be accompanied by an explanation which states in
detail the reason for the lay-off and the basis for each employee's
inclusion on the list.

D. The lay-off procedure for bargaining unit employees is detailed in each
collective bargaining agreement. The Department of Human Resources
must be contacted when contemplating the lay-off of a union employee.

II. Lay-Off Procedure

A. If an appointing authority, in consultation with the executive chain of
command, determines that a lay-off is necessary, the appointing authority
shall immediately consult with the Department of Human Resources and
the Civil Service Commission.

B. Once the need for lay-off and classifications affected are determined, a list
of those employees to be affected shall be prepared by the Department of
Human Resources and the Civil Service Commission. The criteria for
establishing a lay-off list is by classification, by division and specifically,
according to Rule 8.20 of the Civil Service Rules.

C. Employees shall be laid off in the inverse order of their appointment in
their classification. Employees must be laid off in the following order:

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 27

1. Emergency, 30-day employees

2. Transitory, 60-day employees

3. Part-time employees

4. Seasonal employees

5. Employees holding temporary appointments who have not
completed their probationary periods

6. Employees holding temporary appointments who have completed
their probationary period

7. Employees holding regular appointments who have not completed
their probationary period

8. Employees holding regular appointments who have completed their
probationary period

D. The completed proposed lay-off list will contain:

1. Civil Service classification

2. Date in classification

3. Date of original hire

4. Regular or temporary appointed status

5. An in-depth explanation of the lay-off recommendation.

E. When possible, the City will give two week's notice to employees to be
laid off.

F. When the proposed lay-off list has been reviewed and approved by the
executive chain of command, the Department of Human Resources will
send the approved lay-off list to the director of the department where the
lay-off is to take place.

B-8

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
B-8
Page | 28

G. Upon receipt of the lay-off list, the director of the affected department will
notify each affected employee of his/her lay-off status.

H. Deletions or additions to the lay-off list may not be made until the
proposed additions or deletions have been approved per step F of this
section.

I. Once a lay-off has been announced and letters sent, the Department of
Human Resources will be responsible for furnishing affected employees
with information explaining their benefits and any other pertinent matters.

J. When and if laid-off employees are to be recalled, any rescinding of lay-
off letters must be authorized by the Director of Human Resources.
Additionally, employees recalled may be subject to a pre-employment
physical and drug test as well as a criminal background check. For more
information on pre-employment physicals, see section B-12 in this policy.

III. Recall Procedure

A. The recall procedure for bargaining unit employees is detailed in each
collective bargaining agreement.

B. Non-bargaining unit employees should refer to Rule 8.24 of the Rules of
the Civil Service Commission for the recall procedure.

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Signature
Director of Human Resources
_
Title
February 1, 2013

Date

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 29
B-9

Nepotism Policy
I. Purpose

The Ohio Ethics Law and related statutes (R.C. Chapter 102; §§ 2921.42 and
2921.43 defines the restrictions on hiring family members, business associates,
and friends by public officials and employees.

A. The policy's purpose is not prohibitive, but to require full disclosure by an
employee of his or her relationship to an applicant, candidate, or current
employee transferring within divisions or departments. Public employees
are not to use, or cause to be used his or her position or influence to
secure such employment.

B. The City of Cleveland encourages and welcomes the application of
qualified candidates for employment. The City is committed to fair and
equal treatment of all employees and applicants.

C. Nepotism in the workplace fosters the perception of favoritism and the
potential for unequal treatment, therefore, the City of Cleveland has
adopted the following policy, for all new hires, promotions, and transfers.

II. Policy

A. A City official or employee may not directly influence decisions related to
the recruitment, hiring or the terms and conditions of employment of a
person who is a member of the employee's immediate family, with whom
he or she shares a household, or with whom he or she has a personal
relationship.

B. The City of Cleveland prohibits a public official (employees) from hiring or
using his or her authority or influence to secure such employment for any
family member or person whom she or he has a personal relationship
with. The policy does prohibit the public employee from securing a job, or
job-related benefits for his/her family member.

C. A family member includes mother, father, children, sister, brother, spouse,
any step-relation, domestic partner, grandparents, uncles, aunts, and
cousins, and in-laws of the same relation as any of the forgoing. A family
member also includes any other person related by blood or by marriage
and living in the same household.

D. Household includes anyone with whom the employee shares a house,
apartment, or other living arrangement.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 30
B-9

D. No officer or employee shall make employment decisions affecting an
immediate family member, household member, or person with whom they
share a personal relationship, such as but not limited to, direct
supervision, affecting a performance review, disciplinary actions, transfers,
promotions, or compensation, by direct or indirect means.

III. Enforcement

A. Upon application for hire, promotion, transfer, job bid, or other
reassignment, an employee or applicant will be required to report if any
family members are City employees, and where assigned, if known at the
time.

B. Appointing Authorities and/or Personnel Administrators shall report
to the Department of Human Resources any occasion where this
policy affects an employment or employment-related decision or when an
employee's change of personal circumstances results in violation of this
policy. The Department of Human Resources will monitor the effect of
this policy.

C. This policy does not supersede any legal obligations of the City of its
Appointing Authorities, nor does it supersede or change the provisions of
any collective bargaining agreement.

D. Except for the employment relationship described in Section II above,
family relationships among City of Cleveland employees do not constitute
per se nepotism under this policy. Appointing authorities will, however,
disclose family relationships when there is a change in a related
employee's job or pay status.

IV. Policy Violation

A. Any officer or employee who intentionally violates this policy shall be
subject to the City of Cleveland's progressive discipline policy.

1. Employees who, by virtue of changes of circumstances such as
marriage or subsequent hiring, come into violation of this policy
shall immediately notify management so that alternative measures
can be considered.

2. Employees who knowingly fail to notify management of a change of
status or circumstances which result in violation of
this policy shall be subject to the City's discipline policy.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 31
B-9

3. Management shall determine the measures necessary to correct
violations of this policy arising from changes of status or
circumstances but will, subject to operational needs, take the
affected employees' preferences into consideration.

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Director of Personnel & HR
_
Title
March 17, 2008

Date

Signature

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 32

OFFICE OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION

I. Ohio Public Employers Risk Reduction Program

A. It is the intent of the City of Cleveland to recognize and implement the
standards for employee health and safety as required by the Office of
P.E.R.R.P., Division of the Ohio Bureau of Workers' Compensation.

For questions regarding P.E.R.R.P. health and safety requirements as they
pertain to the City of Cleveland, refer to the Office of Risk Management,
an Office of the Department of Finance.

II. Filing a Workers' Compensation Claim

A. The procedure for filing a workers' compensation claim is as follows:

If an employee is injured during the course of employment, he or she must
report to his or her supervisor immediately, filling out an O.W.C.-3,
employees/injured worker report of on-duty injury form.

1. In case of a life threatening or catastrophic injury, the employee
should report to the nearest capable medical facility or call EMS
immediately for attention. For non-life threatening or non-
catastrophic injuries, the injured worker should report to a City
approved medical facility whenever feasible. All medical facilities in
the immediate Cleveland area have the ability to supply the
employee with a First Report of Injury Form (F.R.O.I.) to be
completed by the employee.

2. The supervisor is required to complete form O.W.C.- 4, Supervisor's
Report of Workplace Accident. (See B-10-1)

3. The employee must complete form O.W.C. - 3, Employee's Report
of Workplace Accident and Claimant Release of Medical
Information. (See B-10-2)

B-10

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
B-10
Page | 33

4. Once steps one through three are completed, a complete packet
consisting of the F.R.O.I., O.W.C.-3, O.W.C.-4 and the complete set
of medical records should be submitted to the Department of
Finance, Office of Risk Management. The claim will be reviewed,
certified or rejected, and reported to the Bureau of Workers'
Compensation to receive a claim number. A claim cannot be
certified without all of the necessary information. (Claims may or
may not be approved by the Office of Workers' Compensation,
depending on the evaluation of all information and circumstances
regarding the injury.)

B. All questions regarding workers' compensation claims should be directed
to the Department of Finance, Office of Risk Management.

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Signature
Director of Personnel & HR
_
Title
March 17, 2008

Date

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
B-10-1
Page | 34

SAMPLE

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
B-10-2
Page | 35

SAMPLE

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
B-11
Page | 36

OVERTIME/COMPENSATORY TIME POLICY

I. General Guidelines

A. Under certain circumstances, City employees may be required to work more
than their regularly scheduled hours.

B. Overtime/compensatory time is governed by state and federal laws, as well as
collective bargaining agreements.

C. For the purposes of this policy, eligibility for overtime/ compensatory time is
established when a non exempt employee works in excess of forty (40) paid
hours in a week (unless stated otherwise in an applicable collective bargaining
agreement).

D. Employees covered by collective bargaining agreements shall receive
compensation for overtime/compensatory time hours worked in accordance
with their respective agreements. Any additional agreements regarding
overtime/compensatory time must be negotiated with the affected bargaining
unit(s).

E. Unless specifically stated in a collective bargaining agreement, sick leave is not
included as hours worked in the calculation of overtime.

F. In order to maintain the safety of all City employees, within a twenty-four (24)
hours period, no employee may work more than sixteen (16) continuous hours
of overtime without an eight (8) hour break.

G. All overtime must be approved in advance by the appointing
authority or designee. An employee who fails to obtain prior approval for
overtime worked and/or paid is subject to disciplinary action.

II. Non-exempt Employees (those covered by the F.L.S.A.)

A. Non-exempt employees are to be compensated for overtime worked at a rate of
one and one half times their regular rate of pay.

B. Non-exempt employees include all employees who are paid hourly.

C. Each department/division shall prepare a written statement outlining the
procedure for overtime approval and overtime compensation.

1. All overtime must be approved by the appointing authority or authorized
supervisor in writing pursuant to the department/divisional procedures
before it is worked.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
B-11
Page | 37

2. For overtime of an emergency nature documentation of such overtime is
allowed by verbal approval of the appointing authority; but still requires
documentation within the next business day. No overtime is allowed to be
updated into the KRONOS time keeping system without prior signed
approval of the appointing authority. Requirements fall under the same
guidelines as preapproved overtime; needing written authorization
although after the fact.

3. An employee who works overtime without first gaining approval from the
appointing authority is subject to disciplinary action.

4. The central payroll file is the official record for all approved
payroll/personnel transactions. Therefore, all overtime/compensatory
time transactions (i.e. money and time accrual and use must be
thoroughly documented in the payroll system without exception)

D. Accumulated compensatory time can be used at the employee's
request, with the approval of the appointing authority based on
operational needs.

E. Each department shall develop a written policy stating how non-
exempt, non-bargaining unit employees will be compensated for
overtime hours worked. The policy must include the following elements:

1. Statement of whether the non-exempt, non-bargaining unit employee
receives payment or compensatory time for overtime hours worked.
Compensation will be at the rate of one and one half hours for each
overtime hour worked.

2. If overtime compensation is paid in the form of compensatory time, then
the policy must also have the following provisions:

a. Each employee will be limited to a maximum of 240 hours of
accrued compensatory time which cannot be carried over from
year to year. Exceptions may be made upon the discretion of the
appointing authority dependent upon operational needs.

b. Any hours accrued after the maximum amount is reached shall be
compensated by cash payment.

c. Accumulated compensatory time may be used at the employee's
request, with the approval of the appointing authority based on
operational needs.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
B-11
Page | 38

d. When an employee's accrued compensatory time is unused at
their separation from employment, the employee will be paid for
that time.

e. All other provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act (F.L.S.A.) must
also be adhered to.

III. Exempt Employees (those not required to be paid overtime/ compensatory
time by the F.L.S.A.)

A. This policy applies to all employees except for those in the following groups who are
not under any circumstances eligible for approval of overtime/compensatory time (as
per City ordinance):

1. Executive Assistants to the Mayor

2. Directors of Departments

3. Secretaries to Directors of Departments (Assistant Directors)

4. Commissioners of Divisions

5. Deputy Commissioners of Divisions

6. Assistant Commissioners of Divisions

7. Special Assistant to the Mayor

8. Planning Director

9. Executive Director of Community Relations Board

10. Secretaries to the Boards and Commissions

11. Attorneys in the Civil and Criminal Divisions of the Department of Law

B. The director of each department in conjunction with the Director of
Human Resources shall promulgate a written policy delineating the specific
regulations governing compensatory time for the exempt employees of that
department, as required by City ordinance. The provisions listed below shall
govern the accrual and use of compensatory time for departments in which
exempt employees have been granted compensatory time but in which no written
policy has been promulgated.

1. A written policy must be developed and it must include the following
components:

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 39

i. Overtime compensation in the form of compensatory time shall
not exceed one hour of time off for each overtime hour worked.

ii. Employees shall use the accrued compensatory time within one
year of the date on which it was earned. Exceptions may be
made upon the discretion of the appointing authority dependent
upon operational needs.

d. Each employee will be limited to a maximum of 240
hours of accrued compensatory time, which cannot be carried
over from year to year. Exceptions may be made upon the
discretion of the appointing authority dependent upon operational
needs.

e. The unused accrued compensatory time may not be
converted into cash at any time including separation from
employment.

2. Accumulated compensatory time may be used at the employee's request,
with the approval of the appointing authority based on operational needs.

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Signature
Director of Human Resources

Title
August 31, 2015

Date

B-11

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 40
B-12

PRE-EMPLOYMENT PROCEDURES

I. Pre-employment Physicals - Full-time employment

A. Applicants for full-time employment with the City of Cleveland are required to
submit to a criminal background and motor vehicle license check, successfully
complete and pass a pre-employment physical examination, including drug
and alcohol screen, prior to being hired.

B. Pursuant to Pursuant to the federal Fair Credit Reporting Act, and after an
offer of employment has been made, the City of Cleveland will conduct a
comprehensive review of an applicant's background through an investigative
consumer report.

C. When an applicant is approved for hire, a date for the pre-employment
physical examination, including drug and alcohol screen will be arranged by
the Department of Human Resources.

a. The hiring division and/or department will be notified of the date, time
and place of the physical examination.

b. It will be the responsibility of the department/division to notify the
prospective employee.

D. The medical facility conducting the examination will notify the Department of
Human Resources if the prospective employee has been medically cleared to
perform his or her assigned job. Upon clearance, the Department of Human
Resources will notify the department/division of the clearance and the date,
time and place for new employee orientation along with the new employee's
start date.

E. Former City of Cleveland employees hired, rehired or reinstated are required
to submit to a criminal background and motor vehicle license check as well as
a new hire physical examination, including drug and alcohol screen, prior to
being hired, rehired and/or reinstated.

F. No employee shall begin work prior to completing the criminal background
and motor vehicle license check, pre-employment physical (including the
City's having received a drug and alcohol screening) without the approval of
the Director of Human Resources.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
B-12
Page | 41

II. Pre-employment Physicals - Part-time/seasonal employees, recalls
and Reinstatements

A. Applicants offered positions other than full-time will be required to submit to
a pre-employment drug screen. Applicants for employment who are under 18
years old must complete the pre-employment drug test consent form and the
form must be signed by an adult who is responsible for the applicant. (See
Form B-12-1).

B. Any and all employees who are reemployed more than 60 days after being
separated from the City are required to submit to submit to criminal
background check and pass a physical and drug screen prior to returning to
work as a condition or reemployment. This also may include a criminal
background check.

C. An employee who returns to employment following an involuntary termination
may be required to undergo a physical and drug screen as a new employee.

D. An employee who is being recalled from a layoff may be subject to a pre-
employment physical and drug test prior to returning to work.

III. Failure of Drug Screen

Prospective employees who fail their drug screen, will be so notified and any
offer of employment will be rescinded. They may file another application for
employment with the City of Cleveland one (1) year from the date of their
previous pre-employment physical examination, drug and alcohol screen.

This policy has been issued under the authority of:
Director of Human Resources
_
Title
March 26, 2018

Date

Signature

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
B-12-1
Page | 42

DRUG FREE WORKPLACE POLICY AND
PRE-EMPLOYMENT DRUG TEST CONSENT FORM

The City of Cleveland is committed to providing a drug free workplace. As a means of
accomplishing this goal, the City requires that once an applicant is selected as a
candidate for employment he or she must undergo a pre-employment drug test. An
offer of employment is conditional until the applicant submits to and successfully
completes a drug test with a negative result for illegal drugs. That result must also be
received by the City before an offer of employment can be fully executed. The policy
also applies to applicants under the age of 18.

I have read the above statement regarding the City of Cleveland's policy of pre-
employment drug testing, and I understand that I cannot be employed by the City
unless I take a drug test and the result of said test is negative. If applicable, the adult
individual listed below will be notified of the result of this test. Therefore, by my
signature below, I consent to take a pre-employment drug test administered by the City
of Cleveland.

Name of minor child (print)

Signature Date

I have read and understand the above statement regarding the City of Cleveland's
policy of pre-employment drug testing and that it applies to the above-named minor
child. I affirm that I am either a parent or that I am legally responsible for the above-
named minor child. I understand that by signing this consent form, I allow the City of
Cleveland to conduct a pre-employment drug test on the above-named minor child.

Name (print) Relationship

Signature Date

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 45
B-13

PROCEDURE FOR INTER-DEPARTMENTAL/DIVISIONAL TRANSFERS

I. Procedure for Inter Departmental/Divisional Transfers

The following procedure is to be followed by appointing authorities who
desire to interview City employees outside their division.

A. Before any contacts or interviews are scheduled with any individuals,
appointing authorities must have an approved Personnel Request.

B. If the appointing authority decides to make an offer to a City employee
from another division, contact must be made directly with the present
appointing authority outlining this intention. By taking this step, an
appointing authority will have the opportunity to evaluate the impact this
potential loss will have on the operation of the division and initiate the
appropriate action.

C. Once an understanding has been reached between appointing authorities,
including time frame, the Department of Human Resources should be
immediately informed of this agreement so the appropriate steps can be
initiated where necessary.

By following this procedure, it can be ensured that all parties involved are brought
into the process at the appropriate time and operational needs are met.

II. Impact of Interdepartmental/Divisional Transfer
An Interdepartmental/Divisional transfer is not considered to be a break in
service. Employees who are transferred retain all service time earned during
previous continuous employment with the City.

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Signature
Director of Personnel & HR

Title
March 17, 2008

Date

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 46
B-14

Public Records Policy

I. Public Records
This office, in accordance with the Ohio Revised Code, defines records to include the
following: any document - paper, electronic (including, but not limited to, email) or
other format - that is created or received by, or comes under the jurisdiction of a public
office that documents the organization, function, policies, decisions, procedures,
operations, or other activities of the office. All records of the City of Cleveland are
public unless they are exempt from disclosure under the ORC.
All exemptions are to be construed in favor of disclosure as required by law and any
denial of public records in response to a valid request must be accompanied by an
explanation, including legal authority, as outlined in the ORC. If the request is in
writing, the explanation must also be in writing. If only a portion of a record is exempt,
then only that portion may be withheld or redacted. Redactions must also be
accompanied by an explanation.

It is the policy of the City of Cleveland that, as required by Ohio law, records will be
organized and maintained so that they are available for inspection and copying in
accordance with the law. The City of Cleveland record retention schedule is available in
the City of Cleveland's Law Library; located in the Public Administration Branch of the
Cleveland Public Library on the first floor of City Hall (an outline of the retention
schedule is available online at www.city.cleveland.oh.us.)

II. Record Requests
Requests for public records must clearly state the records and/or information being
sought to allow the City of Cleveland to identify, retrieve and review the records. If a
request is vague and overbroad, the City may deny the request, but must inform the
requestor about the manner in which records are kept and how the City accesses the
records so that the requestor can revise the request.

For management and efficiency, the City has a public record request form available.
The requestor does not have to put a request in writing and does not have to provide
his or her identity or the intended use of the requested public record. The City does not
limit or condition the availability of public records based on whether a written form is
used or whether a request identifies him or herself. However, the records custodian
may ask for a written request and may ask for the requestor's identity and/or intended
use of the information requested

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 47
B-14

if (1) it would benefit the requestor by helping the public office identify, locate or
deliver the records being sought and (2) the requestor is informed that a written
request and the requestor's identify and intended use of the information are not
required.

Public records are generally available for inspection during the normal operating hours
of the department, division, or office location. Public records must be made available for
inspection promptly and copies of public records must be made available within a
reasonable period of time. "Prompt" and "reasonable" take into account the volume of
records requested, the proximity of the location where the records are stored; and the
necessity for any legal review of the records requested.

Each request should be evaluated for an estimated length of time required to gather
the records. Most routine requests for records should be satisfied immediately if feasible
to do so. Routine requests include, but are not limited to, meeting minutes, salary
information, personnel rosters, police incident reports, building and violation notices
and permits. If a limited number or copies are requested, or if the records are readily
available in an electronic format that may be emailed or downloaded easily, these
should be made as quickly as possible.

The City may charge for the actual cost of making copies of records. The City's current
costs are as follows:

• 5 cents per page of paper copy
• $1.00 per diskette
• $2.50 per compact disc
• $2.00 per audio tape
• $2.50 per video tape
• $1.00 per 5x7 photograph
• $2.00 per 8x10 photograph
• If an outside duplication service is requested, all charges from an outside
duplication service are passed on to the requestor.

March 17, 2008

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 48
B-15

SEPARATION FROM CITY EMPLOYMENT

I. Separation from City Employment

A. Separation from City employment occurs in a number of ways. This policy
serves to clarify the differences in types of separation. More specific
information on benefits after separation can be found in the benefits section
of this manual.
Types of Separations:
1. Resigned - Any employee who desires to leave in good standing shall
file with the appointing authority a written resignation giving at least
two weeks notice of his or her intention to leave City employment,
unless the appointing authority consents to an earlier resignation
date.

2. Retired - All employees fall into one of the three categories described
below:
i. Group A: To qualify for retirement an employee must be:
a. Employed with 30 years of retirement credit or
b. Age 65 with 5 years of retirement credit
ii. Group B: To qualify for retirement an employee must be:
a. Employed with 32 years of retirement credit or
b. Age 52 with 31 years of retirement credit or
c. Age 66 with 5 years of retirement credit
iii. Group C: To qualify for retirement an employee must be:
a. Age 55 with 32 years of retirement credit or
b. Age 67 with 5 years of retirement credit.
3. Disability Retirement - Based upon which group an employee fits into,
they may request disability retirement after they reach a certain age
and have enough retirement credit. Disability retirement is applicable
if an employee is considered to be mentally or physically incapacitated
for the performance of his or her assigned duties. Please refer to
Section A-15 or www.opers.org for additional information regarding
eligibility for disability retirement.
i. Uniformed Police and Fire employees may also be eligible for
disability retirement from Police and Fire Pension Funds.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 49
B-15

ii. Employees should contact the payroll representative within
their division for additional information.

4. Deceased - Any employee who is no longer living.

5. Probationary Separation - An employee's performance during the
probationary period that does not merit continued employment is
subject to probationary termination. (Civil Service Rule 6.80C)

6. Dismissed/Terminated - Any employee who is separated due to
disciplinary action:
i. Discipline - Any employee whose conduct, in the opinion of a
superior, is such as to require that the employee be relieved
of duty immediately. (Civil Service Rule 9.10B).
ii. Absent Without Leave (A.W.O.L.) Resigned - Any employee
absent from duty without leave for ten consecutive
scheduled work days shall be deemed to have resigned from
City employment. (Civil Service Rule 8.45).
7. Layoff - Any employee separated due to lack of work, or lack of funds.
8. Employment Completed - Any employee hired for a specific project or
program shall be separated at the completion of that project or
program.
B. Separation Benefits are due to an employee who terminates from City of
Cleveland employment.

1. All earned, unpaid salary
2. All earned, unpaid longevity
3. Conversion of accrued sick leave (on the basis of one-third of
accumulated sick leave hours times the average of the highest three
years of pay). This benefit is paid out only for employees who retire
from the City of Cleveland.
4. Pro-rated vacation for the current year
5. Accrued, unused vacation from previous years
6. Unused compensatory time

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 50
B-15

C. Return of City of Cleveland Property

1. All City property, including City Identification Card(s), shall be returned
on the last day of employment. The cost of any City property that is
not returned will be deducted from the former employee's final
paycheck and/or separation payment or the paycheck/payment will be
withheld.

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Signature
Director of Human Resources
_
Title
March 7, 2013

Date

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 51
B-15

COMMUTER POLICY

This policy applies to all City of Cleveland employees. Use of a City vehicle by an
employee is subject to federal tax law and compliance with IRS regulations. Any
changes to federal tax law may impact an employee who uses a City vehicle.

I. Introduction

In general, personal use of a City of Cleveland (government) vehicle, including
commuting to and from work, is considered taxable and is reported to the IRS. Under
the Internal Revenue Code, the City is required to include the value of an employee's
personal use of a City vehicle in the employee's income, unless the City of Cleveland
collects a commuting fee.

The personal use of a government-owned vehicle is generally a taxable fringe benefit. It
may, however, be excludable as a de minimis benefit. Personal use includes the value
of commuting in a government-owned vehicle, even if the vehicle is taken home for the
convenience of the employer.

A City of Cleveland employee using a qualified personal use vehicle is not eligible to pay
the commuting fee. A qualified non-personal use vehicle is any vehicle the
employee is not likely to use more than minimally for personal purposes because of its
design. Qualified non-personal use vehicles include:

Clearly marked police, fire, and public safety officer vehicles. The employee must be on-
call, required to commute in the vehicle, and be prohibited from personal travel outside
the jurisdiction.
• Unmarked vehicles used by law enforcement officers. The officer must be
authorized to carry a firearm, execute search warrants and make arrests.
• Qualified specialized utility repair truck
• An ambulance or hearse used for its specific purpose.
• Any vehicle designed to carry cargo with a loaded gross vehicle weight over
14,000 pounds.
• Delivery trucks with seating for the driver only, or for the driver plus a folding
jump seat.

II. Procedure

Under limited circumstances an employee may be assigned a City-owned motor
vehicle for short or long-term use.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 52
B-15

A. Personal use of a City-owned vehicle by a commuting employee is strictly
prohibited. However, if personal use is an infrequent occurrence (less than
once a month) this may be excludable as de minimus.

B. Upon a showing of the business need to assign a City-owned vehicle to an
employee, the employee's appointing authority and the Chief Operating
Officer may grant commuting privileges in writing to such employee.
Criteria for granting commuting privileges include meeting a combination
of the criteria set forth below, but other criteria may also be considered:

1. The employee's regular work activities require a substantial
amount of driving on City business several days per week.

2. The employee must be "on call" at all times at the direction of
the appointing authority in order to meet non-business hours
emergency, security, or public communications needs of the
City.

3. The employee is required to use specialized equipment that
cannot be feasibly attached to or transported in the employee's
personal vehicle.

C. If a commuting employee's duties change such that the criteria in this
Policy are no longer met, the employee shall immediately relinquish the
vehicle to the City.

III. Commuting Valuation

Under the Internal Revenue Code and Section 171.421 of the Codified Ordinances,
each employee granted commuting privileges will be charged a commuting fee
(other than a qualified non-personal use vehicle, discussed earlier) to be determined
by the Director of Finance.

1. The commuting fee shall be deducted from the employee's pay.
The City has determined the value of the vehicle provided to the
employee for commuting by the value of each one-way commute
(home to work or work to home) at $1.50.

2. If more than one employee commutes in the vehicle, this value
applies to each employee.

The commuting fee imposed by Internal Revenue Code and Codified Ordinance Section
171.421 will be charged even when the vehicle is undergoing repair and while the

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 53
B-15

employee is on vacation. If the employee is on extended leave, the employee may
request that commuting privileges and the corresponding fee be suspended. Upon the
employee's return to duty, the procedures set forth in Procedure B-16-1 (immediately
following this policy) must be followed to reinstate commuting privileges.
If an employee believes that a commuting fee has been improperly charged or
overcharged, the affected employee should direct a written request for an adjustment
to the employee's appointing authority, who shall forward the request to the
Department of Finance and Division of Accounts with a recommendation. If the
Director of Finance or Commissioner of Accounts along with the Chief Operating Officer
concurs that an improper charge or overcharge has occurred, s/he shall issue an office
voucher.

IV. Long-Term Authorized Use Vehicles
A. No City-owned vehicle shall be assigned to an employee for long-term use
throughout the 5-County area except in extremely limited circumstances.
Upon a showing why general assignment of a City-owned vehicle is
required for City business, the Chief Operating Officer may determine that
long-term regular use privileges in the five-county area is in the interest of
the City and may grant such privileges in writing to such employee.

B. In the case of a long-term use employee or a control employee (under
Section C), the value of the City-owned vehicle assigned to the employee
will be reflected on the employee's Form W-2, along with the value of fuel
supplied by the City. No commuting fee shall be collected from a long-
term regular use employee (or a control employee). The employee should
consult his or her own tax advisor to determine whether a portion of the
amount may be deducted from income as a deductible expense.

C. Special Rule for Control Employees

1. A control employee is any elected official of the City or any employee
earning the applicable annual salary as determined by the Internal
Revenue Service.

2. A control employee commutes but is not eligible to pay the commuting
fee described in this policy.

3. The value of the City-owned vehicle assigned to the control employee
will be reflected in the control employee's Form W-2, along with the
value of any fuel supplied by the City. No commuting fee shall be
collected from a control employee.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 54

V. Driver Identification and Vehicle Cards

This policy incorporates the Fuel Policy (Human Resources Policy C-10)

VI. Vehicle Use Application and Authorization

A. In January of any given year, or beginning on the date of approval, of
assignment of a City vehicle, each employee who pays the commuting fee
shall be subject to payroll deduction for the commuting fee.

B. If an employee is not acting within the scope of his or her employment
while operating a City vehicle, the employee is personally liable for any
damages or injuries sustained in the use of the vehicle. As described in
Human Resources Policy C-16, State law requires all licensed drivers to
obtain insurance to cover this possibility. It is the sole responsibility of
the employee to obtain this insurance coverage

C.  Each employee who is granted privileges under this policy shall submit a
photocopy of his or her Ohio driver's license and proof of insurance for
City-assigned vehicles to the Commissioner of Motor Vehicle Maintenance
(MVM) between January 1
st
 and January 15
th
 of each year.

D. While operating a City vehicle, whether on city business or otherwise, the
employee is governed by this policy.

E. Each employee who is granted privileges under this policy shall take all
appropriate measures to keep the vehicle safe from damage and secure.

F. To be assigned a City-owned vehicle, the appointing authority shall follow
the procedure as outlined in Procedure B-16-1 and Form B-16-2.

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Director of Human Resources

Title
March 26, 2018

Date
B-16

Signature

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 55

Commuter Vehicle Procedure

The appointing authority must obtain a request form from the Commissioner of Motor
Vehicle Maintenance (MVM) and have it completed by the employee seeking commuting
privileges. The employee must return the completed form to his or her appointing
authority. The employee's appointing authority and the employee's department director
must sign the form approving the assignment and forward the form to the Chief
Operating Officer. For department directors and employees in the Mayor's Office, the
Mayor's Chief of Operations must sign the form approving the assignment privileges.

1. The Department of Public Works shall submit the form to the Mayor's
Chief of Operations for final approval.

2. If all approvals are obtained, the Chief Operating Officer will forward
the approved request form to the Commissioner of MVM, with a copy
to the employee's appointing authority.

3. The employee's appointing authority will return a copy of the form to
the employee.

4. If approved, the Commissioner of MVM notifies Central Payroll to begin
payroll deduction if necessary and notifies the Division of Accounts.

5. If an employee wishes to terminate the assignment of a vehicle, he or
she must send a written notice to the appointing authority. The
appointing authority will forward the notice to the Commissioner of
MVM. The employee should include with the notice his or her payroll
number. The Commissioner of MVM will record the transaction and
forward the approved original to Central Payroll and copies will be sent
to the employee.

The Commissioner of MVM, through the Chief Operating Officer, will maintain
all the City of Cleveland Vehicle Use Application/Authorization Form (B-16-2)
concerning City-owned vehicles assigned to employees.

B-16-1

CITY OF CLEVELAND VEHICLE USE APPLICATION/AUTHORIZATION FORM

Department / Division   Payroll #
Employee Name   Title   Social Security #
Home Phone #   Work Phone #  Work Location
Vehicle Code   Year   Make/Model   Vehicle License #   Mileage

Driver's License #   DL Date Issued   DL Expiration Date
Does vehicle require any special equipment? Emergency Lights □ Cell Phone Cradle □ 800 MHz □

Specialized tools / equipment specify:   Other
□ Insurance Insurance Policy Number:   Insurance Policy Expiration:
New Request □ Renewal □
Justification Statement: I am requesting commuting privileges for the purpose of
□ New: The above applicant is approved commuting privileges. □Commuter (Short Term) □Long Term  □Control □Qualified Non-Personal Use
□ Change: The above applicant is approved to change commuting privileges. □ Commuter (Short Term) □Long Term □Control □Qualified Non-Personal Use
□ Cancellation: The above applicant is approved to cancel commuting privileges. □ Commuter (Short Term)  □Long Term □Control □Qualified Non-Personal Use

Commissioner Date Department Director Date Chief Operating Officer Date
In accordance with Ordinance Number 2268-90, I hereby authorize the Commissioner of Accounts to deduct □Commuter Valuation or □ reflected on my Form W-2 as a condition of take-home
privileges for the City owned vehicle. Further, I have read and agree to comply with all requirements set forth in the City of Cleveland Vehicle Use Policy, including obtaining coverage under my
personal automobile insurance (proof of insurance is required).

Signature of Applicant   Date
(The Division of Motor Vehicle MUST be notified of any change in information)

Page | 56
B-16-2
CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies

DIVISION OF MOTOR VEHICLE MAINTENANCE USE ONLY

Returned to Fleet Manager on (DATE)
Forwarded to Central Payroll on (DATE)

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 57

PLUS ADJUSTMENT PAY

No classified, non-bargaining unit employee will receive plus
adjustment pay without written approval through a plus adjustment
form and / or approval from the Mayor and Director of Finance. Plus
adjustment pay for classified bargaining unit employees will be
approved only as provided in the employee's collective bargaining
agreement. Language within collective bargaining agreements
supersedes language within this policy.

Per 173.01 City Council is exempt from this policy for their Executive
Assistants' monthly pay adjustments made out of Council Members'
monthly business expense account.

I. Definitions
A. Plus Adjustment- Temporary additional compensation paid to
an employee for the following reasons:
1. Performing duties outside of their normal job
classification.
2. To make corrections for payroll errors.
B. Acting Capacity-An employee who performs all of the duties of
a classification other than his/her normal classification. For the
purpose of this policy, plus adjustments and acting capacity
have the same requirements.

II. Eligible Employees
A. An employee is eligible to receive plus adjustment pay if the
employee's status is:
1. Classified, Regular Civil Service, Non-Bargaining Unit
2. Classified, Bargaining Unit
3. Not otherwise excluded by this policy
B. Qualifying actions that would result in a plus adjustment
payment are as follows:
1. Correction of a payroll error
2. An employee performing duties of a job in a higher job
classification than their current position. (This type of
plus adjustment payment would require approval by
the Mayor if the adjustment is greater than a 5%
increase and / or made in more than 3 pay periods in a
calendar year. See section III Part B.)
C. Qualifying actions that would not result in a plus adjustment
payment are as follows:

B-17

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
B-17
Page | 58

1. Employees' assigned additional duties within their job
classification (reference Civil Service job
descriptions as 'other duties assigned').
2. Classified, Regular Civil Service, and Non-Bargaining
Unit employees cannot receive plus adjustments for
performing Classified, Bargaining Unit duties.
3. Classified Bargaining Unit Employees cannot receive
plus adjustments for performing Classified, Regular Civil
Service, Non-Bargaining Unit duties.
4. A plus adjustment cannot be given to an employee
while the division is waiting on a promotion to be
approved and processed through a Personnel
Information Document (PID).
5. An employee performing duties of a job in a lower job
classification than their current position cannot receive
a plus adjustment for performing the additional duties.

Classified, Regular Civil Service, Non-Bargaining Unit Employees

III. Approval Process for Plus Adjustment Pay

A. Plus Adjustment Request Form
1. All plus adjustment payments must be documented on
the Plus Adjustment Request Form. See Attachment A
(Form 10-01 which supersedes 81-237).
2. All fields on the plus adjustment form must be
completed for each payment to be processed. If the
field not applicable it should be marked "n/a".
3. The period of service in the acting/plus adjustment
capacity must have a definite start date and end date
which are to be included in the Comments column.
4. If the 'Other' reason code is used on the request form
for the plus adjustment, the Comments column must
indicate the reason for the plus adjustment.
5. Approval signatures must be obtained by the
timekeeper and Director or Appointing Authority before
the Plus Adjustment Request Form is input into the
KRONOS system.
6. All completed forms and necessary documentation must
be retained in the Department/Division for each pay
period the employee is in that position.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 59

B. All plus adjustments exceeding 5% of the employee's regular
wage rate and / or plus adjustments to be paid in excess of 3
pay periods per calendar year require the following:
1. The Department Director submits a written request to
the chief of the applicable cluster for an employee to
receive the plus adjustment. This request must include
the following:
a. Justification for the plus adjustment
b. Duration of the plus adjustment payments
providing specific dates, for example, 1/1/20XX
- 1/31/20XX.
c. Name and position of the employee in whose
place the acting employee will be working.
d. Verification the employee working in the plus
adjustment position is qualified per Civil
Service rules.
e. Proposed dollar amount of plus adjustment per
pay period, in total for all pay periods, the
percentage of wage increase per pay period
and the percentage increase in total for the
duration of the adjustment.
f. A statement that the employee who is
appointed in an acting capacity has the
signature authority to approve all transactions
that would normally be approved by the
employee in whose place the acting employee
is working.
2. Cluster Chief reviews the request with the Mayor or
Mayor's designee and the Director of Finance.
3. Cluster Chief notifies the department director
concerning approval or denial of request for
appointment to Acting Capacity.
4. If approved, a copy of the approval notice is forwarded
to the Division of Accounts and the
Department/Division notifies the employee to be
appointed to Acting Capacity of the terms of the
appointment.
5. If denied, the department director may not pay a plus
adjustment to the employee working in acting capacity.

B-17

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 60
B-17

IV. Allowable Hours

A. Overtime - Plus Adjustment compensation is eligible for
payment at time and a half of the plus adjustment rate for
overtime worked
B. Holiday Hours - Eligible for plus adjustment payment
C. Vacation Hours - Not eligible for plus adjustment payment
D. Sick Hours - Not eligible for plus adjustment payment
E. Personal Hours - Not eligible for plus adjustment payment
F. Compensatory Hours Used - Not eligible for plus adjustment
payment

V. Entry of Plus Adjustments into KRONOS -

A. Completed Plus Adjustment Request Forms and approval notices
given by the Mayor are to be retained by the
Department/Division and input into the KRONOS system no later
than the Tuesday before final payroll processing for each pay
period the employee is in that position.
B. The Division of Accounts will receive a copy from the
Department/Division for any employee appointed to Acting
Capacity by an approval notice given by the Mayor no later than
the Tuesday before final payroll processing for the first pay
period of the effective date of the approval notice.
C. The Division of Accounts will compare the Central Payroll Plus
Adjustment Audit Report with the approval notices given by the
Mayor that are on file in the Division of Accounts. Any Plus
Adjustments input into the KRONOS system by the
Department/Divisions that do not have an approval notice given
by the Mayor on file in the Division of Accounts in accordance
with section III B, will be stripped from the pay file and not
processed.

Classified, Bargaining Unit Employees

VI. Approval Process for Plus Adjustment Pay

A. All plus adjustments for bargaining unit employees will be made in
accordance with the applicable collective bargaining agreement.
B. Documentation of payments to be completed in the Plus
Adjustment Request Form, as noted below. Along with the Plus
Adjustment Request Form, copies of the applicable sections of the
collective bargaining agreements supporting the plus adjustment
payments should be included with the form.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
B-17
Page | 61

C. The Division of Police must use their specific plus adjustment forms
that have been approved by the Division of Accounts, which were
set up to follow collective bargaining agreement terms.
D. The Division of Fire must use their specific plus adjustment forms
that have been approved by the Division of Accounts, which were
set up to follow collective bargaining agreement terms for all plus
adjustments except Acting Pay.
E. Plus Adjustment Request Form - to be used by all divisions other
than the Division of Police.
1. All plus adjustment payments must be documented on the
Plus Adjustment Request Form. See Attachment A (Form
10-01 which supersedes 81-237)
2. All required fields on the Plus Adjustment Request Form
must be completed for the payment to be processed.
3. The period of service in the acting/plus adjustment
capacity must have a definite start and end date included
in the Comments column.
4. If the 'Other' reason code is used for the plus adjustment,
the Comments column must indicate the reason for the
plus adjustment.
5. The Calculation column of the plus adjustment form will
include a calculation of how the plus adjustment total was
determined.
6. Approval signatures of the timekeeper and Director or
Appointing Authority must be obtained before the payment
can be entered into KRONOS.

VII. Employees Assigned Multiple Job Duties

A. A Personnel Information Document (PID) must be completed by
the division to assign multiple job duties to an employee. Once
processed, the time for the hours worked in each job can be coded
in KRONOS according to the job performed.
B. Payments made for multiple job duties should not be made through
plus adjustments.

Bi-Weekly Review

VIII. Report Criteria & Distribution
A. The Division of Accounts will run a Bi-Weekly Payroll Plus
Adjustment Audit Report in accordance with payroll pay dates. The
Report will detail the following information:
1. Department
2. Division

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 62

___________________________
3. Employee Name
4. Employee ID Number
5. Job Description
6. Union or Non-Union
7. Current Pay Period Adjustment
8. Acting Pay
9. Plus Adjustment Pay
10. Plus Overtime Pay
11. Plus Regular Pay
12. Total # of Year-to-Date Adjustments

B. Once the report is completed, the Division of Accounts will
distribute the Bi-Weekly Payroll Plus Adjustment Audit Report to the
following:
1. Director of the Department giving the plus adjustment.
2. Commissioner of the Division giving the plus adjustment
3. Director of Finance - All plus adjustments for all divisions
4. Director of Human Resources - All plus adjustments for all
divisions

A review of these payments should be completed bi-weekly to ensure that
all payments are made in compliance with the above policy.

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Signature
_
Direct
_
or of Human Resources
Title
November 7, 2014

Date

B-17

Page | 63

Sample PLUS Adjustment Request Form

B-17-1
CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
B-18
Page | 64

EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM (EAP)

I. Policy Statement

The City of Cleveland cares about the health and well-being of its employees and
recognizes that a variety of personal problems can disrupt their personal and work lives.
While many employees solve their problems either on their own or with the help of
family and friends, sometimes employees need professional assistance and advice.

The City of Cleveland will provide confidential and voluntary assistance through its
Employee Assistance Program ("EAP") to all employees and their family members who
may be faced with dynamic challenges of financial concerns, legal issues, alcohol or
drug problems, marital problems, illness of a family member, emotional worries, child
care problems, etc. For the welfare of employees as well as effective business
operations, the City encourages its employees to take advantage of this valuable benefit
of employment.

II. Application

Employees and their family members can refer themselves to the EAP. The program
may be reached 24 hours a day on weekdays and weekends. There is no charge for
employees or their families to use the services of the EAP.

EAP counselors are available to meet with employees or family members to assess a
problem and develop a plan for resolution. The counselors may suggest a referral to an
outside resource, such as a therapist, agency, physician, treatment facility or other
professional that would be appropriate to assist in resolving the problem or situation.
Where an employee may be in need of information, a referral, or suggestion, contact
may be made with the parties over the telephone.

Employees who want to visit the EAP during regular work hours must use sick, vacation
or personal time. If illness is involved, sick, vacation and/or personal time may be used
for treatment or rehabilitation on the same basis that it is granted for other health
problems.

The EAP counselors will make every effort to coordinate referral for ongoing treatment
with the employee's health insurance coverage as well as his/her ability to pay.

III. Mandatory Referral

Where there are severe or repeated occurrences of an employee's unsatisfactory job
performance on or off duty, where attendance is unsatisfactory or there appears to be
signs of other problems, the supervisor should counsel the employee in consultation
with the Director of Human Resources or designee with an end toward resolving the

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
B-18
Page | 65

situation. If the employee appears to be unable or unwilling to correct the situation, the
employee may be mandatorily referred by the Appointing Authority or designee to the
EAP to assist in the resolution of the problem.

The employee may accept or refuse participation in the EAP; however failure may result
in disciplinary action up to and include discharge. Continued employment at the City
may be contingent upon the employee calling the EAP for assistance or an employee

IV. Participation

Participation in EAP Program does not jeopardize job security or promotional
opportunities. However, it does not excuse the employee from following the City's
policies and procedures or meeting required standards for satisfactory job performance
except where specific accommodations are required by law.

All contact between an employee and the EAP is held strictly confidential. In cases
where an employee's continued employment is contingent upon calling the EAP, the
EAP counselor will only verify whether or not the employee has contacted the EAP and,
if ongoing treatment is necessary, and that the employee is following through on the
treatment.

Although this policy is intended to encourage voluntary rehabilitation, nothing in this
policy waives the City's rights to discipline an employee, to initiate or to cooperate with
law enforcement in prosecuting offenders.

See the City of Cleveland DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE Policy for additional information.

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Director of Human Resources
_
Title

March 26, 2018

Date

Signature

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
B-19
Page | 66

FAIR HIRING POLICY

I. Statement of Policy

The City of Cleveland is an equal employment opportunity employer with the goal of
hiring the best qualified applicants for City employment. The City is committed to
ensuring just and fair measures and practices when screening and identifying persons
eligible for employment, regardless of whether they have had past convictions or
arrests.

Except as otherwise required by state or federal law, the City shall not inquire about an
applicant's conviction history until a conditional offer of employment is extended. City
job applications shall not contain a "box" or inquiry regarding a job applicant's prior
convictions.

The City will follow the steps identified below when conducting a criminal background
check:

A. A background check will be performed only if an applicant has received a
conditional offer of employment;

B. If the background check reveals a conviction, the applicant will not be
automatically disqualified from employment, unless prohibited by state or federal
statute; and

C. The Appointing Authority along with the Director of the Department of Human
Resources will consider the relevance of the criminal investigation using the
following parameters:

1. Whether the criminal conduct for which the person was convicted has a
direct and/or specific negative bearing on a person's fitness or ability to
perform one or more of the duties or responsibilities necessarily related to
the employment sought;

2. The nature and severity of the offense;

3. The age of the applicant at the time of the offense;

4. The date of the offense;

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Personnel Policies and Procedures
General Policies
Page | 67
B-19

5. How long the person has lived while not incarcerated or under correctional
supervision without having any new convictions; and

6. Any evidence demonstrating the applicant's rehabilitation.

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Director of Human Resources
_
Title

August 8, 2011

Date

Signature