--- PAGE 1 ---
CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
1 | P a g e

CITY OF CLEVELAND
HUMAN RESOURCES POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL

Section C - Workplace Policies and Procedures
The Workplace Procedures section of this policy manual is intended to create an
environment which is  safe, healthy and productive. These policies and procedures are
designed not only to protect City of Cleveland employees, but are also structured to
provide management with the necessary tools to be effective.
       Table of Contents

 Policy
Number
Policy,  Procedure and/or Forms
  Page
Number
C-1
Anti-Discrimination
(Policy location: New Policies Section)
2
C-2 Anti-Idling 3
C-3 Attendance Policy 5
C-4 Civil Service Policy 12
C-5 Criminally Charged Employees 13
C-6 Drug -Free Workplace 15
C-7 Equal Employment Opportunity Policy 17
C-8 Email and Internet Usage Policy 20
C-9 Gift and Gratuities 35
C-10 Fuel Policy 36
C-11 Human Immunodeficiency Virus (H.I.V.) /Acquired
Immune Deficiency Syndrome (A.I.D.S.)
Workplace Policy
46
C-12 Ticket Procedures 48
C-13 Required Licenses for Operation of City Vehicles 54
C-14 Sexual Harassment Policy
(Policy location: New Policies Section)
58
C-15 Solicitation and Distribution 59
C-16 Vehicle Use Policy 61
C-16-1 Motor Vehicle Accident Procedure 67
C-17 Workplace Casual Dress Policy 76
C-18 Workplace Smoking Policy 77
C-19 Workplace Violence Policy
(Policy location: New Policies Section)
80
C-20  Drug & Alcohol Policy
 (Policy location: New Policies Section)
81
C-21 Ethics Policy 82
C-22 Personal Electronic Devices 85
C-23 Workplace Professional Dress 87
C-24 Progressive Discipline Program Policy 89
C-25 Gambling While On-Duty 100
C-26 Social Media Use Policy 102
C-27 Workplace Safety Policy 104
C-28 Timekeeping Policy 109

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
2 | P a g e

ANTI-DISCRIMINATION

The current
Anti-Discrimination Policy
can be located under the New
Policy Section of Human
Resources (HR) Policies and
Procedures.

*Upon review of all HR Policies and
Procedures a newly user-friendly
manual will be generated and
distributed.

C-1

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
3 | P a g e

ANTI-IDILING POLICY

Reduce Vehicle Idling
Vehicle idling gets zero miles per gallon; unnecessary idling wastes fuel and pollutes.
Running an engine at low speed (idling) also causes twice the wear on internal parts
compared to driving at regular speeds. The break-even point for shutting off and
restarting gasoline engines or leaving it  to idle is  30 seconds - from the point of    view of
both emissions and fuel consumption.

Over the last several years, Northeast Ohio and the City of Cleveland have been
attempting to lessen pollutants that pose a detriment to the region's air quality.
These pollutants include nitrogen oxide, carbon dioxide, particulate matter, and volatile
organic compounds. However, the region is still in a non-attainment status.

Idling of    vehicles consumes approximately 17% of    the fuel that a vehicle has on board.

Effective immediately, unless exempted in  the following section, no City vehicle or piece
of equipment is to be idled in a non-emergency situation. The operator of the
vehicle/equipment is to turn-off the unit and the keys are to be removed from the
ignition.

EXEMPTIONS

The following situations will allow idling, as needed:

1. Emergency vehicles at scenes where lights, PTOs, and/or other accessories are
needed to accomplish the mission;
2. Division of Police vehicles working traffic enforcement details;
3. Department of Public Service, Department of Parks, Recreation and Properties,
Department of Public Utilities, and Department of Port Control vehicles at job
sites requiring the use of emergency lights, PTOs, and/or other accessories to
accomplish their assignment; and
4. Inclement weather situations and the supervisor authorizes the use of the
vehicle/equipment heater-defroster for the work crew's comfort according to the
guidelines listed below;
If   the outside temperature is:  Above 32 degrees F: 5 minute maximum
Between -10 and 32 degrees F; 15 minute maximum
Below -10 degrees F: as necessary

NOTE:  Operators of    vehicle/equipment and supervisors will be judicious in  the idling of
units at emergency scenes and job sites.  If not all the units at the scene/site need to
be idling, those units must be turned-off and the keys removed from the ignition.
C-2

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-2
4 | P a g e

Each vehicle/equipment operator will be responsible for the idling operation of their unit
and will have the unit keys in their possession to ensure that crewmembers do not
arbitrarily violate the policy without the operator's knowledge.

Supervisors in each department/division will be responsible for the adherence and
enforcement of the idling policy. Violations of the policy are will be documented as to
the vehicle/equipment operator, vehicle code, location, date and time, weather
conditions, and circumstances of the violation.

The vehicle/equipment operator will be informed of the violation by the supervisor at
the time of the infraction.

The appointing authority of each department/division will be responsible for the
discipline of employees found to be violating the policy.  Discipline will be per City of
Cleveland disciplinary procedures, any union contract, and in a progressive manner.

March 17, 2008

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-2
5 | P a g e

ATTENDANCE POLICY

I. Employees shall report to work at the regularly scheduled arrival time and
remain at work until the scheduled departure time. Employees shall observe
unpaid lunch and break times as scheduled.  Deviations from an employee's
established attendance requirements are covered by leave policies as described
in the Human Resources Policies and Procedures Manual and in the applicable
collective bargaining agreements.

An employee who fails to adhere to attendance requirements shall undergo
progressive discipline as detailed in the schedule described in this policy. If an
employee's previous discipline for    any reason under this Policy was within an 18-
month time period, the employee will progress to the next step of the Discipline
Schedule. Where the most recent discipline issued is more than 18-months old
that discipline will no longer be used against the employee, and the employee's
discipline will resume at the First Step.

Whenever an employee is granted an approved leave of absence, the time
between the effective date of approved leave of absence and his/her return to
duty shall not be considered to be part of    the 18-month time period mentioned
above.  Upon return to duty following such leave of absence, such employee
shall be required to complete the unexpired portion of his/her 18-month period
in order for the discipline to no longer be used against them.

The attendance policy applies to non-exempt employees; however,
exempt employees will be held to reasonable standards (i.e. Civil
Service Rules) and expectations of their direct supervisor and will be
subject to  the appropriate level of corrective disciplinary action up to
and including termination.

Where the terms of an applicable collective bargaining agreement
conflict with this policy, those conflicting terms of the collective
bargaining agreement shall apply.

II. For purposes of    this policy, standards that apply to "attendance" include and are
contained in the following categories:
A. Absence Without Leave (A.W.O.L)
B. Sick/Absence Abuse Control
C. Time and Attendance/Kronos Guidelines
D. Tardiness Control

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-3
6 | P a g e

III. ABSENCE WITHOUT LEAVE (A.W.O.L.)

A. City employees who are governed by a collective bargaining agreement that
specifies an attendance related policy are subject to the disciplinary schedule
of the applicable agreement.

B. City employees must report to work at their regularly scheduled times. If
an employee is unable to report to work due to illness or for any other
emergency, the employee must inform his    or her supervisor in  accordance
within time limits and procedures as designated by the
department. Employees are required to call one (1) hour prior to the start
of    their shift if  they are going to be absent. Failure to comply will result in
the employee not being paid for the time absent and subject the
employee to discipline under the City's Progressive Discipline Policy.

C. Employees who call in thirty (30) minutes after the start of their shift will
be considered A.W.O.L. In addition to failing to report to work or calling
in   at the time designated, an employee will also be considered A.W.O.L., if
he or she departs from his or her worksite before the end of his or her
shift or workday or for scheduled breaks, without the approval of his or
her supervisor.

D. Time records should reflect the proper notations of A.W.O.L. on the days
of    each occurrence. Once the employee contacts the designated authority,
his or her status may change from A.W.O.L. to either Excused Absence or
Unexcused Absence, from that point forward. The reason for absence will
be noted A.W.O.L., the employee will not receive pay for this period and
the employee may be subject to disciplinary action under this policy.

IV. A.W.O.L. Resignation

A. City employees who are governed by a collective bargaining agreement
that specifies breaks in seniority, based upon AWOL shall be disciplined
according to the disciplinary schedule of the applicable agreement.
Employees who are A.W.O.L. for three (3) consecutive scheduled work
days shall be classified A.W.O.L. resigned, provided that the requirements
of Civil Service Rule 8.45 are met.  In order to be considered A.W.O.L
resigned, the employer must notify the employee in person or at the
employee's last known address via regular U.S. Mail of the A.W.O.L.
resignation decision. Absent the employee providing a reasonable
justification for the absences within 7 (seven) calendar days, the
employee's A.W.O.L. resignation employment status will be considered
final.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-3
7 | P a g e

V. SICK/ABSENCE ABUSE CONTROL

Through sick leave, the City compensates employees who, due to
personal or family illness, cannot report to work. Paid sick leave is to be
requested or used for an employee who is absent due to medical, dental
or optical examination, or treatment of the employee or member of the
employee's immediate family.  Employees utilizing paid sick leave are to
be at home or caring for their illness or that of their sick family member,
unless away receiving medical attention such as in  a hospital, at a   doctor's
office or at a pharmacy.

Sick leave is  not to be overused (used in  excess of    the Attendance Policy
provisions) or used as additional vacation or personal leave. Employees
found overusing or abusing sick leave privileges will be disciplined.

A. Sick/Absence Procedures

1. To control absence abuse, it  is  necessary that all   Appointing
Authorities compile accurate attendance records.

2. An employee must report his/her own absence unless prevented from
doing so by extraordinary circumstances. All absences are to be
reported one (1) hour prior to the start of work.

3. For employees who are engaged in  twenty-four (24) hour operations,
the employee must report an absence no later than one hour prior to
the employee's scheduled starting time, subject to the terms of the
applicable collective bargaining agreement.

4. If an employee does not timely notify his or her supervisor or the
designated sick call-in  line of an absence, he or she will be subject to
disciplinary action.

5. The supervisor must inform his    or her employees where, when and
whom to call when reporting their absence.

6. The date of and reason for    the absence must be accurately recorded
by the Appointing Authority/designee. Call-in procedures should
include such details as:

a) Reason for absence
b) Time of notification
c) Expected date/time of return

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-3
8 | P a g e

B. Sick/Absence Abuse Program

1. The basis for disciplinary action shall be more than thirty (30) hours of
usage within a rolling calendar quarter, or when an employee exhibits
a pattern of usage within any time period. For purposes of this
attendance policy, "rolling calendar quarter" shall be defined as any
consecutive three (3) month period, calculated from the first day of
the month. One time per calendar year an employee can have a non-
FMLA sick leave usage of more than one consecutive shift counted only
as an 8-hour absence. However, employees may be required to
provide medical documentation regarding such absence.

2. A   basis for disciplinary action for    "pattern" of usage may include but is
not limited to
a) absences occurring before or after vacation and/or personal
leave;
b) absences occurring repetitively before or after weekends or
holidays;
c) absences occurring repetitively immediately before or after
paydays;
d) absences occurring repetitively when difficult jobs or
assignments are scheduled;
e) absenteeism causing individual work performance and /or
operational needs to suffer;
f) absences occurring repetitively during certain times of    the
month or year.

3. A   basis for    disciplinary action may also include consistently using most, or
all, earned sick leave each year, i.e. employees utilize more time than
what has been earned (excused and/or unexcused absences).

4. In no case shall an employee's accumulated sick leave balance be the sole
determinant of a pattern of abuse; however, it may be a component.

5. Absences that are documented as approved FMLA, extended medical
leave,  Funeral Leave, vacation, holiday, personal days or compensatory
time shall not be considered as part of the 30 hour threshold or as a
pattern of usage. All other absences shall be counted as part of the 30
hour threshold and/or considered for a "pattern" of usage.

6. The employee shall be notified in writing that he or she has used more
than thirty (30) hours of sick time within a rolling calendar quarter and is
subjected to progressive discipline.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
9 | P a g e

An employee shall be progressed to the next step of the discipline schedule each time a
review of the employee's absences reveals a violation of attendance requirements as
set forth herein.

VI. MISSED SWIPE GUIDELINES

The  City  of  Cleveland  expects  every  employee  to  give  the  citizens  of
Cleveland a full and productive day of work during their scheduled working
time. Employees of the City of Cleveland will be subject to disciplinary action
for time and attendance abuse, including but not limited to falsification of
time records.

If  this  policy  conflicts  with  the  provisions  of  any  collective  bargaining
agreement,  it  is  understood  that  the  collective  bargaining  agreement
supersedes.

A. Procedures

The Kronos System (or other City approved timekeeping software) is  the
means through which employee attendance records are maintained.
Employees are expected to utilize this system so that timekeeping is
uniform and reliable. Please refer to the City of Cleveland's Timekeeping
Policy for specific details on Timekeeping Rules. The time card is to be
used consistent with the following guidelines:

a. Daily swipes are required as follows:

i. Start of work day
ii. In  any  departments  where  time  for  a  meal  period  is  not
automatically deducted, the beginning and end of the meal
period (determined by divisional operating policy)
iii. End of    work day

b. Under  no  circumstances  may  an  employee  swipe  another
employee  in  or  out.  Any  and  all  employees  involved  in  this
type of violation will be subject to termination.

1. An employee who misses three (3) swipes in a thirty (30) calendar
day period due to forgotten swipes or lost cards will be subject to
progressive discipline. Each violation of these guidelines due to late
swipes will be treated as an incident violating the Attendance  Policy.

C-3

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
10 | P a g e

VII. TARDINESS CONTROL

The City of Cleveland expects every employee to give the citizens of Cleveland a
full and productive day of work. Employees who are tardy, excluding salaried-
exempt employees, will not be paid for any time they are absent from
work without authorization. Employees of the City of Cleveland will be
disciplined for tardiness.

A. Tardiness is  defined as
1. Arriving less than thirty minutes after the start of    the work day,
2. Exceeding the time allotted for lunch
3. Exceeding the time allotted for break

B. Tardiness Distinguished from AWOL---Employees who arrive thirty (30)
minutes or more after their scheduled start time will be considered absent
without leave and will receive progressive discipline under the Attendance
Policy.

C. Tardiness Control Program

1. An employee who is tardy three (3) times in a thirty (30)
calendar day period will be disciplined under the Attendance
Policy.

2. The employee will be progressed to the next level of
discipline for    being tardy three (3) times in  a   thirty (30)
calendar day period.

Any employee who is  determined to be tardy is  not permitted to make-up
any missed time.

VIII. Disciplinary Schedule

Employees who violate any of the above standards listed in  Sections III   -
VII above will receive progressive discipline according to the following
schedule:

Step 1: Written Warning I
Step 2: 2
nd
 written warning
Step 3: One (1) Day Suspension
Step 4: Five (5) Day Suspension
Step 5: Discharge from employment
C-3

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
11 | P a g e

A. Progressive steps in discipline will be preceded by a pre-disciplinary
conference.  The employee will be notified in  writing of the date, time
of the conference, and right to request the presence of a
representative.

a. An employee-member of    a collective bargaining unit has the
right to have his    or her union representative attend the pre-
disciplinary conference.

b. Non-union employees may have a representative of their
choice.

B. Copies of an adverse disciplinary action will be sent to the Civil Service
Commission and the employee's collective bargaining representative
where applicable.

Director of    HR

Title
September 28, 2015
Effective Date

C-3
This policy has been issued under the authority of:
Signature

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-4
12 | P a g e

CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION

The Charter of the City of Cleveland provides for appointment of five electors as
members of the Civil Service Commission that shall make, promulgate, and when
necessary may amend, rules for the appointment, promotion, transfer, lay-off,
reinstatement, suspension and removal of city officials and employees in  the classified
service.

I. Civil Service Rules
A. Civil Service rules state the terms and conditions of employment for
employees who are not represented through a   collective bargaining
agreement.
B. The Civil Service rules address, fitness for duty hearings, political
activity restrictions and testing requirements that apply to all   classified
employees.
C. The most current version of the Civil Service rules is  dated 2006.
D. Copies of Civil Service rules are available through the Civil Service link
on the City of Cleveland web page.

II. Civil Service Tests
A. All    employees are eligible to apply to take a Civil Service Test so long
as the employee
1. files a written application on the forms prescribed by the
Commission
2. is  qualified in   accordance with the minimum entrance
qualifications for the examination and
3. has had his/her application approved in   accordance with the
rules of the Commission.

III. Meetings of the Civil Service Commission
The Civil Service Commission holds regular meetings on the second and
fourth Friday of every month and are open to the public.

Title
June 22, 2009

Date

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-5
13 | P a g e

CRIMINALLY CHARGED EMPLOYEES

A. Policy Statement

All    employees are obligated to report charges and convictions.  City employees charged
with a crime are subject to administrative charges for violations of city policies and
procedures whether the misconduct occurred on or off-duty.   Administrative charges
shall be preferred and held in abeyance pending resolution of the criminal proceeding.

B. Felony Charges

An employee charged with a felony shall be suspended without pay pending the
adjudication of the criminal charges. The Appointing Authority may within his/her
discretion allow the employee to continue working in  either a   limited or regular capacity
if the Appointing Authority determines that the charge does not effect the employee's
job duties.

C. Misdemeanor Charges

An employee charged with a misdemeanor shall continue working in  a   regular or limited
capacity unless within the discretion of the Appointing Authority the criminal charges
relate to or affect their job duties.

D. Use of    Benefit Time

Within the discretion of the Appointing Authority, the employee, while suspended
without pay, may draw down his/her vacation, personal, or compensatory time.  In no
event shall an employee be allowed to use sick time.

E. Court Ordered Protection Orders

Upon being granted by the Court, the victim of    a Protection Order must notify City of
Cleveland Security of such an issuance. With this, if a defendant tries to enter a
workplace, Security could intervene in  advance of    any interaction between defendant
and victim.

F. Discipline

Upon adjudication of the criminal charges the pre-disciplinary hearing shall be
reconvened.  The City reserves the right to amend any administrative charges.  The
Appointing Authority shall adjudicate the administrative charges.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-6
14 | P a g e

An employee who has been suspended without pay pending adjudication of criminal
charges, and who has been subsequently found not guilty of the criminal charges, may
request reimbursement for the time on suspension.  However, the employee is not
guaranteed reimbursement for any time or pay lost during his/her suspension. Whether
any reimbursement is awarded will depend on the resolution of the administrative
changes, and the facts in each case.

In no event shall an employee be reimbursed for any time or pay in excess of the
applicable Speedy Trial period as determined under state or federal law for    the alleged
crime.

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Director of Human Resources
_
Title

August 31, 2015

Date

Signature

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-6
15 | P a g e

DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE

I. Policy Statement

A. In accordance with the Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988 (Pub. L. 100-
690, Title V, Subtitle D), the City of Cleveland is  notifying its employees of
the City's policy regarding drugs in   the workplace. Without exception, the
unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession or use of a
controlled substance while in the workplace is strictly prohibited.

B. This includes the abuse of    controlled/prescription drugs.

C. Employees are prohibited from drinking alcohol during work hours.

D. The City requires, pursuant to the Drug-Free Workplace Act, that as a
condition of employment, any employee convicted of a drug violation
occurring in  the workplace must notify his    or her Appointing Authority
within five days after the conviction.

II. Enforcement

A. Any employee found in  violation of    this policy is  subject to appropriate
disciplinary up to and including discharge.

B. Civil Service Rule 9.10 states that any officer or employee in    the classified
service may be discharged, suspended or reduced in rank for intoxication
or misuse or abuse of drugs in the course of his or her employment.

III. Employee Assistance Program

A. The City's Employee Assistance program (E.A.P.) provides confidential
counseling and referral services to City employees with drug or alcohol
dependence problems.

1. Assessment and referral services are free.

2. If   further assistance is  necessary, the employee's regular health
insurance and his or her ability to pay are considered.

3. EAP information is  available in  the Department of    Human
Resources.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
16 | P a g e

B. Additionally, the Department of    Human Resources will periodically offer all
employees a   drug-free awareness program to inform employees about the
dangers of drug abuse in the workplace and to further explain this policy.

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Director of Personnel & HR
_
Title
March 17, 2008

Date

C-6

Signature

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
17 | P a g e

EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY POLICY

I. Equal Employment Opportunity Policy

A. It is  the policy and practice of   the City of Cleveland to further the principles of
all   federal, state and local Equal Employment Opportunity laws, rules,
regulations, guidelines and Executive Orders.

1. The City of Cleveland will provide equal opportunity in  each and
every phase of the City's daily operation to all   employees and
applicants for employment.

2. The City of Cleveland will continue to recruit, hire, train and promote in  all
classifications without regard to race, color, religion, sex, age, national
origin, physical or mental disability, sexual orientation or status as a
Vietnam Era veteran or qualified disabled veteran, except where age or sex
are bona fide occupational qualifications.

3. The City of Cleveland will continue to ensure that all   personnel layoffs,
educational assistance, social and recreational programs and any
other terms and conditions of employment are provided in  an impartial
manner. Every effort will be made to base decisions on employment so
as to further the principles of Equal Employment Opportunity.

4. The City of Cleveland will hold accountable all   appointing authorities,
management and supervisory representatives and employees for    their
compliance with both the spirit and intent of   federal, state and local
legislation, government regulations, rules, guidelines and executive
orders in   providing Equal Employment Opportunity.

B. Complaints of    unlawful discrimination will be handled discreetly and
confidentially, to the extent permitted by law, through the City's internal
complaint procedure, which is  administered by the Division of Equal
Employment Opportunity (E.E.O.) located in the Department of Human
Resources in Room 121 of City Hall.

II. Reporting Complaints

A. Any employee who believes that he or she has been subject to unlawful
discrimination should immediately contact his    or her supervisor or another
supervisor in the chain of command or the Manager of EEO.

C-7

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
18 | P a g e

B. A   supervisor who receives a  report of unlawful discrimination must
immediately report the complaint to the appropriate management designee
who is  responsible for handling discrimination complaints; and this management
designee must immediately report the complaint of unlawful discrimination to
the Director of Human Resources/or designee.

C. If the supervisor, manager or Appointing Authority is  the cause of    the
complaint, or the employee believes that the supervisor, manager or
Appointing Authority is  otherwise biased or has properly failed to report the
complaint, the employee should directly contact the Director of Human
Resources/or designee to report his or her complaint.

D. Any complaint of unlawful discrimination, including complaints involving
non-City employees (i.e., vendors, contractors, etc.) who may work at or
visit City facilities for business or other reasons, should be forwarded to
the Director of Human Resources/or designee. Upon receipt of the
complaint, the Division of Equal Employment Opportunity (E.E.O.) will
contact the complainant immediately to begin the investigation.

III. Confidentiality

A. The privacy of   the Complainant(s) and the individual(s) accused of   unlawful
discrimination will be kept confidential to the extent permitted by the law.

IV. Timeliness

A. The Division of Equal Employment Opportunity (E.E.O.) will thoroughly
investigate all   complaints as timely as staff and resources allow.

V. Management's Responsibility

A. Each member of management has the responsibility to ensure that the working
environment is  free of    unlawful discrimination.

VI. Corrective Action

A. Corrective action will be taken if  any employee, supervisor or other individual is
found to be engaging in  unlawful discrimination against City employees.

C-7

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
19 | P a g e

VII. Retaliation

A. Retaliation for charges made under this policy will not be tolerated.
Employees should feel free to raise their concerns about unlawful
discrimination to supervision or management without fear of   retaliation.

VIII. Contact Personnel

A. If an employee has questions, concerns or wishes to file   a charge of unlawful
discrimination, he or she should contact the Department of   Human Resources,
Division of    Equal Employment Opportunity (E.E.O.).

B. For additional information, please contact the following agencies:

1. U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (E.E.O.C.)
Cleveland District Office
1240 E. 9
th
 Street, - Suite 3001
Cleveland, Ohio 44199
216-306-1120

2. Ohio Civil Rights Commission (O.C.R.C.)
Cleveland Regional Office
Frank Lausche Building - Suite 885
615 West Superior Avenue
Cleveland, Ohio 44113-1899
216-787-3150

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Signature
Director of Personnel & HR
_
Title
March 17, 2008

Date

C-7

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
20 | P a g e

C-8
POLICY ON EMPLOYEE USE OF E-  MAIL AND THE INTERNET

Section 1. Purposes

1.0. The purposes of the City of Cleveland's computer and other electronic systems,
including, but not limited to, electronic mail ["e-mail"] and the Internet/Intranet ("Net"),
are to provide an efficient and effective means of internal and external communications,
and to improve work productivity.  The City of Cleveland (City) promotes Net and e-mail
use that enables employees, volunteers, and contractors to perform City missions and
encourages its employees, volunteers, and contractor personnel to develop Net and e-
mail skills and knowledge. It is expected that employees will use the Net and e-mail to
improve their job knowledge; to access business, scientific, technical, and other
information on topics that have relevance to the City of Cleveland; and to communicate
with their peers in other government agencies, academia, and industry on matters of
relevance to their work for the City. This policy addresses access to, and the disclosure
of information to or from all electronic systems. This policy applies to all employees,
volunteers, and contractors (collectively "users") of the City of Cleveland.

Among other things, this policy is intended to guide users in the performance of their
duties.  This policy serves as notice to users that all data, including any that are stored
or printed as documents, are subject to audit and review. There is no expectation of
personal privacy in   the use of the Net and e-mail systems when users use computers or
services the City provides.  Further, access to the Net and an e-mail system is a
privilege, not a right.  The City may withdraw this privilege at any time.

Finally, this policy serves to outline acceptable uses of the Net and e-mail systems by
users while using government-owned/leased equipment, facilities, Net addresses,
domain names, and/or e-mail services registered to or provided by the City. It seeks to
ensure that the use of the Net and e-mail systems by City employees, volunteers, or
contractors while conducting work for the City and/or while using City provided systems
is consistent with the City of Cleveland's policies, all applicable laws, and the individual
user's job responsibilities. The Division of Information Technology Services (ITS), or
the Departmental or Divisional Systems Administrator, as appropriate, will administer
this policy. In    the enforcement of this policy, the regular City disciplinary procedures will
apply.

The City will review this policy periodically and update it  as appropriate.
1.1. This policy applies to:
(a) All Information Technology (IT) resources owned or leased by the City that
are used on or accessed from City premises, or that are used for City business.  This
policy also applies to all activities using any City-paid accounts, subscriptions, or other
IT services, such as Net access, and e-mail, or other electronic forms of    communication,
whether or not the activities are conducted from City premises; and

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
21 | P a g e

(b) All    full or part-time City employees, volunteers, and contractors
who use City resources to access the Net or e-mail systems.

Section 2. Use and Misuse of Net or E-  Mail Systems

2.0. Access. The City provides Net and e-mail access to employees for their use in
performing their duties for the City.  All    employees of the City are responsible for using
Net and e-mail resources in a professional, effective, ethical, and lawful manner, for
legitimate business purposes only. Net and e-mail resources remain, at all times, the
property of the City.  All Net and e-mail use should be congruent with the City's overall
government policies. The City reserves the right to monitor and/or log all network
activity with or without notice, including all   web site communications. Therefore, users
have no expectations of privacy in the use of these resources. Use of the system in
violation of this or other City policies is prohibited and may lead to disciplinary action,
up to and including termination.

2.1. Acceptable Use.  In the course of City work, users may use the Net and e-mail to
communicate internally with City coworkers or externally with consultants, vendors, and
persons communicating with the City regarding City business. The City provides users
with electronic-communications tools to facilitate communications and to enhance work
productivity. As with the telephone, there may be occasion to use these facilities for
personal purposes. Every employee is expected to minimize the use of the Net and e-
mail for personal purposes. Personal use should not interfere with the performance of
City-related work, consume significant resources, give rise to more than nominal
additional costs, or interfere with the activities of other employees.

Employees must not use of    the City of Cleveland e-mail to send or forward personal
attachments including photos, music or videos. These large attachments consume
significant resources.

In addition to other restrictions and conditions discussed in  this policy, all   users are
prohibited from using any electronic communications tool for improper purposes,
including, but not limited to the following:
(a) Operating in a manner that violates or infringes on the rights of any

other person, including the right to privacy;
(b) Penetrating computer or network security of any City or other

system, or to gain unauthorized access (or attempted access) to any

other person's computer, e-mail, voicemail accounts or equipment;
(c) Operating in a manner that violates the terms of any applicable

telecommunications license or any laws governing transborder data

flow (e.g., laws dealing with data collection, protection, privacy,

confidentiality, or security);
C-8

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
22 | P a g e

(d) Infringing on another person's intellectual-property rights (e.g.,

copyrights);
(e) Operating in a manner that violates City regulations prohibiting

sexual harassment or any other type of harassment;
(f) Using any defamatory, discriminatory, or obscene material;
(g) Restricting or inhibiting other users from using the system, or the
efficiency of the computer systems;
(h)
Encouraging the use of controlled substances or using the system
for the purpose of any criminal intent or activity;
(i) Transmitting material, information, or software in violation of any

local, state or federal laws;
(j) Using the system for any other illegal purposes;
(k) Conducting any political activity, defined as, any activity directed

toward the success or failure of a political party, candidate for

political office, or partisan political group;
(l) Conducting any non-City related fundraising or public-relations

activities;
(m) Engaging in any activity for personal gain or personal-business

transactions;
(n) Making any unauthorized purchases;
(o)
Knowingly opening mail not directed to the user. Except as
provided

by law and to the extent the City reserves the right to access and

review all electronic uses and records, e-mail messages are

confidential;
(p) Sending messages in violation of City IT security policies;
(q) Soliciting or advertising for non-job-related commercial ventures,

religious or political causes, or outside organizations;
(r) Sending confidential information without the proper protections;
(s) Expressing personal opinions as an official City stance or opinion;
(t) Sharing jokes, sending chain letters, or inappropriate solicitations;
(u) Misleading the recipient of any message as to the actual identity of

the sender;
(v) Wasting productive work time through excessive personal use; or
(w) Forwarding electronic messages without a legitimate business

purpose under circumstances likely to lead to embarrassment of the
sender or to violate the clearly expressed desire of    the sender to
restrict additional dissemination.

C-8

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
23 | P a g e

The City understands that web "surfing" may be job-related and serves a legitimate-
business function, but the potential for abuse exists.  The Net provides access to a huge
amount of information and resources that greatly enhance our ability to deliver services
efficiently. Today there is no single, comprehensive directory of resources available for
the Net and users sometimes must "navigate" through much unneeded information to
reach useful material.  The City encourages exploration of the Net for legitimate
business-related or job-related professional activities, but users should avoid "browsing
the web" on City time, creating personal "Home Pages," or otherwise using City facilities
to access Net sites for reasons unrelated to the City's business and related job
responsibilities.

2.2. Making Changes. Users shall not make changes to the way the City's computer
systems are configured, or to the settings of the programs loaded on their respective
computers. If a user has a problem with his or her computer or one of the programs,
the user should contact the ITS Customer Support Center at (216) 664-4357 or send an
e-mail to the ITS helpdesk at ITSupport@clevelandohio.gov. Users are prohibited  from
downloading any software, including, but not limited to, free software. To have a new
software application added to a computer, contact ITS. Users shall not set up their own
connection to the Net on their computers.  If users have a need for Net access, they
must obtain appropriate permission from their Department Management and permission
from the Division of ITS. Once permission has been granted to a user, ITS will establish
a Net connection for that user. If a user leaves the City, the user's privileges for using
the City's Net and e-mail systems will end.

2.3. Representing the City in All Postings. The information you publish electronically
(sometimes called a "posting") reflects on the City in general. Despite all disclaimers
that you make (e.g., that your views are your own and may not reflect those of your
employer) readers elsewhere will make the association between your posting and the
City. You should know that true anonymity is very difficult to obtain when using these
tools.  While Net relay chat, newsgroup visits, and net "surfing" sometimes appears to
be done anonymously (e.g., by employing pseudonyms), accessing such
services/servers through the City's network facilities normally leaves an "audit trail"
indicating the identity of the City proxy/server (and may leave a trail pointing directly to
the specific user). Inappropriate use of City facilities may damage the City's reputation
and give rise to liability. Accordingly, each employee is  required to be professional in  all
use of City communications tools.

Do not use personal, non-business related taglines, slogans, or links in   your e-mail
signature. Taglines, slogans, or links that express inappropriate, political, or
controversial themes are prohibited.

C-8

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
24 | P a g e

2.4. Providing Unacceptable Content. Although the City does not regularly monitor
electronic messages, please be aware that even personal e-mails may be accessed and
reviewed by City management without notice.

Under no circumstances may any posting or e-mail originating at the City be in  violation
of the letter or the spirit of the City's Equal Employment Opportunity or Sexual
Harassment policies.

Examples of unacceptable content include:
(a) Sexually explicit messages, images, cartoons, or jokes;

(b) Unwelcome propositions, requests for dates, or love letters;

(c) Profanity, obscenity, slander, or libel;

(d) Ethnic, religious, or racial or hate slurs;

(e) Biased or discriminatory messages; or

(f) Any other message that could be construed as harassment or

disparagement of others based on their sex, race, sexual
orientation, age, national origin, disability, or religious or political

beliefs.

(g) Jokes, chain letters, or solicitations, which are strictly

prohibited.

Everyone should be aware that "sexual harassment" includes unwelcome sexual
advances, unwelcome requests for sexual favors, or other unwelcome conduct
(including comments) of a sexual nature. The standard for sexual harassment is
whether the recipient could reasonably consider the message to be offensive. The
sender's intentions are irrelevant.

In addition to prohibitions on sending or uploading offensive materials, City
communications tools (e-mail, browsers, newsreaders, etc.) also shall not be used to
access or download obscene materials or "content" that may be illegal.

2.5. Electronic Forgery. Electronic forgery is  defined as misrepresenting a   user's identity
in any way while using electronic-communications systems (e.g., by using another's e-
mail account without permission, or by modifying another's messages without
permission). Electronic forgery is  not allowed for    any purposes. For example, messages
written by others should be forwarded "as-is" and with no changes, except to the
extent users clearly indicate where they have edited the original message (for example,
by using brackets [] or by using other characters * * * to flag edited text).

For e-mail messages, users may not take any action to misrepresent the identity of the
person responsible for the message. Users may send e-mail messages using another
person's account, but only with prior express approval from the account owner, and
only where the text of the message indicates the user is the author.
   C-8

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
25 | P a g e

For newsgroup postings, users may not misrepresent the identity of the sender, and
may not make postings on an anonymous or fictitious basis.

2.6. Intellectual Property. The Net offers a   universe of information, useful in  conducting
and furthering business operations. Users must always respect copyrights and
trademarks of    third parties and their ownership claims in  images, text, video, and audio

material, software, information, and inventions. Users must not copy, use, or transfer
others' materials without appropriate authorization. Users should be aware that
downloaded software and other copyrighted material might be subject to licensing
obligations or restrictions. Even when software is labeled "freeware" or "shareware"
there may be retained licensing restrictions that prohibit or limit the usage or
commercialization of such items.

Users should also note that patent rights may exist independently of any other
intellectual-property rights and that this may be owned by the author of    the software or
even by an unrelated third party.  If users have any questions in this regard, they
should contact someone in the City's Department of Law.

2.7. Transmitting Confidential Information. Confidential information (whether owned by
the City, its customers, its vendors, or other persons) is not to be disclosed to
unauthorized persons without prior authorization by the City.  The question of
"authorization" will be a function of the type and ownership of the confidential
information. Also, "authorization" for disclosure may be limited to certain specific
individuals within the organization (e.g., on a "need-to-know" basis).

In some cases, posting or e-mailing confidential information that relates to new
products or services can constitute a   "publication" and prevent the City from applying
for patents or later treating the information as a   "trade secret." These consequences
can follow even from postings or distributions that are not to the general public.

Generally, the common-sense prohibition of casual disclosures means confidential
information should not be contained in an e-mail sent to outsiders or posted to
newsgroups, and should not be placed on City communications tools that are available
to third parties (e.g., on unsecured PDAs, laptops, or notebook computers that are
accessible to non-City personnel). Users should post such information on "web pages"
only when they are certain that the web page is not accessible from locations outside
the City firewall.

C-8

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
26 | P a g e

Section 3. Limits of Privacy

3.0. Retention and Security of Messages. E-mail messages and computer-stored items
all are City property and business records, and may have legal and operational
effect identical to that of traditional, hardcopy documents (e.g., they are
"discoverable" in litigation, and can be used in evidence). Unless subject to a
specific legal exception, e-mail that documents the organization, functions,
policies, decisions, procedures, operations, and other activities of the City is a
public record. Accordingly, all e-mail messages should be treated as though
others may later view them (while confidential information may be contained in
such messages, these messages should be created with the same care you would
use in creating hardcopy documents).

Remember that no electronic-communications facility is  completely secure.  This means
information stored on or carried over City communications tools may be the subject of
accidental or intentional interception, misdelivery, attack, or authorized City review.

Any e-mail deemed a public record is  subject to the Ohio records-retention laws. All
users are expected to follow the City's policy on Retention of E-mail Messages and
should not destroy e-mails without following the proper procedures.

If a user receives a security alert, warning, or virus, the user must report that to the
ITS Customer Support Center immediately.  A User must not forward this information to
other users.  ITS will be responsible for alerting other users.

3.1. A Limited Expectation of Privacy. The City respects the personal privacy of its
employees. Because communications tools are provided for the City's business
purposes, however, the City reserves the right to access, retrieves, read, and discloses
any data, messages, or files stored on City systems for any purpose. Users and others
should have no expectation that any information transmitted over City facilities or
stored on City-owned or leased computers is or will remain private. These systems are
City-owned and/or controlled and are accessible at all times by the City for
maintenance, upgrades, or any other business or legal purposes.  Employees should be
aware that even when a message is erased or a visit to a website is closed; it is still
possible to recreate the message or locate the website that was accessed.  In the
course of their duties, system operators and managers may monitor employee use of
the Net or review the contents of stored or transmitted data at any time.

The City permits occasional personal use of all these communications tools on the
express understanding that it  reserves the right (for its business purposes or as may be
required by law) to review employee use of, and to inspect all material created by or
stored on, these communications tools. Use of these tools constitutes each employee's
permission for the City to monitor communications and to access files that are made on
or with these communications tools.
C-8

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
27 | P a g e

The City reserves the right to monitor use of these systems to prevent abuse, to
enforce other policies, and to access information. Access may occur, but is  not limited
to, the following situations:

(a) Investigation of suspected impropriety;
(b) Violation of    City policy;
(c) Obtaining Information for legal requirements;
(d) Suspected criminal activities;
(e) Breach of system security;
(f) Collecting substantive information to routinely or randomly monitor employee
performance and conduct;
(g) Determining the presence of illegal material or unlicensed software;
(h) Ensuring City systems are not being used to transmit discriminatory or
offensive messages, or regarding the infringement or violation of    any other
person's rights;
(i) Ensuring the electronic communications tools are not being used for
inappropriate purposes; or
(j) Managing, operating and resolving issues associated with the ownership and
operation of the system.

City Management may disclose the contents of these systems within or outside of the
City without the employee's permission. Furthermore, all   communications including text
and images may be disclosed to law enforcement or other third parties without prior
consent of the sender or the receiver. The City has unlimited access to protect
the security of these systems and the City's property rights.

Section 4. E-  mail Etiquette and "Best Practices"

4.1. Writing Effective Messages. E-mail is ideal for corresponding with colleagues in
different parts of the world, across time zones, and even in the same office. Using e-
mail can save money (e.g., postage, telephone charges, travel), but it cannot always
substitute for face-to-face meetings or telephone calls. Interpersonal communication
should generally be a user's first choice whenever possible. In addition, e-mail should
not be used to resolve conflict or to say things that would not be said in   person. Users
should use common sense in determining when to use e-mail, what is said, and to
whom. Remember that no electronic communication is private and the City reserves
the right to monitor and review all communications originating from or entering the
computer systems.

. E-mail messages may be considered part of the City's official records and may be
subject to disclosure as a public record. Compose e-mail messages in the same
manner and with the same good judgment used for    any other City communication.
C-8

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
28 | P a g e

. Use a   descriptive subject line. Never leave a   subject line blank. It may determine
whether or not the message gets read.  Use a short descriptive statement to help
the recipient decide when he or she should read the message. Take care not to
overstate the urgency of the message simply to get attention.

. If the communication is to a Law Department representative for the purpose of
seeking legal advice, mark the end of the subject line and the top of the e-mail text
"(ATTY-CLIENT-PVG)."  (Forgetting to do so will not constitute a   waiver of the City's
privilege.)
Use courtesy and respect. As with any other form of business correspondence, e-
mail messages should be written using courtesy and respect for    the recipient. Don't
employ rude or facetious remarks that could be seen as unethical or defamatory.

. Don't use all   caps.  Using ALL CAPS in   e-mail is  equivalent to SHOUTING. In
addition, all caps makes text difficult to read, as does all lower case.

. Check spelling, grammar, and punctuation. Don't ignore the basics of writing,
punctuation, and spelling in   e-mail correspondence, and be aware of the tone of
your message.  Use trade jargon, and abbreviations sparingly and appropriately
based on your intended recipient.

. Use a   signature. Include useful information such as your telephone number, position
in    the City, location, and e-mail address.  Different signatures for different recipients
may be appropriate.  For example, shorter signatures may suffice for e-mail to City
coworkers.

4.2. Sending Effective Messages. Don't rely on e-mail alone for sending urgent
messages. The recipient may be out of the office and not checking e-mail frequently.
Follow up with a telephone call or fax.

. A cc: (which used to mean carbon copy) suggests that the message is for
information only-no action is  necessary by the cc-recipients.  Send carbon copies
only to those who really need a copy. Sending unnecessary copies wastes
everyone's time.

. Blind carbon copies should be used with caution, if at all. They may give the
appearance that the user is  going behind someone's back. If   you can't copy the
person directly, consider not sending the message at all.

. Avoid sending "heat of the moment" messages.  When responding to a "hostile"
message, don't hit    the SEND button until you have had a chance to cool off   (use the
"overnight rule"-sleep on it, re-read your message, and revise it before sending).
E-mail messages that are sent in   the heat of the moment are often regretted. Once
sent, they cannot be retrieved.
C-8

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-8
29 | P a g e

Communications that would be inappropriate under other City policies are equally
unacceptable if delivered via electronic communications. These communications
may include, but are not limited to,    harassing or discriminatory comments, breaches
of confidentiality, and insubordinate statements.

. Avoid sending unnecessarily wordy messages.  Remember that some people have to
pay for each byte of data they receive. Keep messages succinct without being so
terse as to be rude.

. Don't leave the sender of a message hanging. If you cannot respond to an e-mail
request in   a   timely manner, consider sending a   quick reply stating you have received
the message and give an estimate of the time it will take you to provide a full
response.

4.3. Replying to Messages. Be careful to use "Reply-to-All" only when appropriate.
Typically, users should address a   reply only to a single person and not to all those who
received the original message.  Likewise, be careful when replying to a message that
was sent by a Bulletin Board (BB) or automatic re-mailer--if you are not careful, your
reply may be sent to the entire audience subscribing to the BB rather than only to the
individual who wrote the original message.

Include the original e-Mail when replying. This is a matter of both courtesy and
efficiency. It avoids making the sender search for his or her original message and may
help to avoid confusion. Use the reply feature to return automatically the original
message and to insert the return address.  When the original message is lengthy,
however, include only enough of it  to jog the sender's memory--sending long messages
can be burdensome on those using dial-up connections. Also, where your reply is
relevant to only a portion of the original message, consider excerpting and including in
your reply only the relevant portion(s).

Don't send an attached file when a text message is sufficient. A few lines or even
paragraphs of text do not warrant a file attachment.  Receiving attachments can be
time-consuming (especially when the recipient is using a dial-up connection) and
requires the recipient to take extra steps to open and read the file. Send attachments
for long messages or when special formatting is necessary. When you send
attachments, take the time to make sure that the attachment does not contain
unnecessary graphics (like letterhead, images, pictures, or logos) or embedded
multimedia-these can increase download time and take up memory by an order of
magnitude.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-8
30 | P a g e

4.4. Forwarding Messages. Don't indiscriminately forward an e-mail to others. Keep in
mind the perspective and rights of the author of the original message-he or she may
not be happy that you have forwarded it. Wherever in doubt, it's more polite to check
with the original author, perhaps by sending a reply message suggesting that the
original message should be distributed to others. Be doubly careful when forwarding e-
mail to persons who are not part of the City.

Don't forward messages marked "Private," "Confidential," or "Attorney/Client Privilege"
without express permission from the author. Avoid communicating confidential and
sensitive information, such as performance reviews, disciplinary and/or corrective
actions, personnel information, and health or medical information via e-mail.

Forwarding chain letters in   the office is  prohibited. If you receive a chain letter, ignore
it and inform the sender that it is an inappropriate use of City time and bandwidth.

Save or archive your e-mails on a regular basis.  If you need help with this procedure
call the ITS Customer Support Center at extension 4357, or e-mail them at the IT
HelpDesk: ITSupport@clevelandohio.gov.

4.5. Protecting Emails from Viruses. Viruses may be easily (and accidentally)
transmitted via e-mail attachments or postings. It is users' responsibility to protect
their files by updating the City's virus protection via   Net connections when prompted to
do so.

When users receive a   virus, they should notify the sender (if    they know that person)
that the file was infected. This may help halt further transmission of the virus.
Ensure attachments have no viruses. Avoid opening an e-mail when you do not know
the sender.

.    To prevent computer viruses from being transmitted through the system, employees
are not permitted to download any software onto their computer or any drive in  that
computer.

. When downloading a file or opening an e-mail attachment, users must scan all
materials with City provided virus protection software.

. Additional consideration of policies established by the Office of IT Planning and
Review, and the Division of ITS should be used in determining how to handle
potentially damaging e-mails or files.

4.6 E-mailing To The Appropriate Person. Email makes it possible for us to contact,
directly and immediately, the Mayor and other highly placed people in the City. Users
should carefully consider, however, both the potential benefit and the consequences of

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-8
31 | P a g e

sending an e-mail to these people, especially if  it  means going over someone's head
and breaking the rules of management protocol and etiquette.

4.7. Checking Your E-mail. Reading e-mail is a professional responsibility, just like
answering the telephone. As a general rule, users should check their e-mail at least
twice a   day when they are not traveling. When on the road, users should check e-mail
as often as possible or enable a colleague to check it for them. If the periodic chime
and window announcing "You Have New Mail," is distracting, users should consider
disabling automatic checks and manually check their e-mail.

4.8. Sending Unsolicited Messages. When sending unsolicited messages, users should
choose their distribution vehicle carefully. E-mail can quickly become junk mail if
unsolicited messages are distributed indiscriminately to an inappropriate audience.
Sometimes simply hitting the delete key is the answer. As the number of unsolicited
messages increases, the recipient's in -box becomes overloaded with "junk."  We can all
appreciate this dilemma. Responsibility lies with each of us, therefore, to choose the
right vehicle and distribute messages to the intended audience in the most efficient
manner for both the sender and the recipients.

4.9. Use of Bulletin Boards. Bulletin Boards (BB) distribute posted messages to all
people who have "registered" with them.  For other BBs, an employee may register and
resign by sending a   message directly to the BB (using a precise format that prevents an
actual posting of the registration message).  Be careful when sending a registration or
resignation message to a bulletin board-if users fail to follow the required format
exactly, their message may be posted to all subscribers. This type of junk e-mail tends
to irritate many people. Likewise, if someone unknowingly posts a message like this,
don't magnify the junk by posting an ugly response back to the BB. Instead, send a
polite message, directly to that person only, explaining the proper procedure.

4.10. Consuming Bandwidth with Unauthorized Tools and Use of Customized
Templates, Colored Backgrounds, Screens and Screensavers. As web-based technology
use expands in the City, newer and trendier tools such as real-time audio, desktop
videoconferencing and webcasting (e.g., Pointcast) are readily available to City
employees with email and Internet access. These tools can consume significant
bandwidth, which is  not unlimited and not free.  Accordingly, these tools are prohibited
without prior authorization from the employee's appointing authority. Always keep in
mind the consumption of scarce bandwidth, which can slow up the performance of the
Internet and email response, and can potentially bring the system to a halt through
excessive usage of unauthorized images, graphics, video, etc.

Good business communications requires clean and crisp email messages that are not
cluttered with fancy images, logos, colored frames and borders. The use of colored
backgrounds, flowers, special artic colors and elaborations are prohibited. The City

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-8
32 | P a g e

standard for  email background is  white for clarity of communications. The use of boards
and fancy backgrounds should not be used for City emails. Email transmissions should
minimize the use of elaborate signatures and images, which do not enhance the
message or information.  This enables the City to more effectively utilize this IT asset,
i.e., network bandwidth.

4.11. E-Mail and/or Net access requires passwords for security; users should be aware,
however, that the reliability of such tools for maintaining confidentiality cannot be
guaranteed. Additionally all passwords should be made known to the City, through the
employee's immediate supervisor and/or systems administrator.

Section 5. Enforcement and Consent.

5.1. This policy is intended to be illustrative of the range of acceptable and
unacceptable uses of    the Net and e-mail systems provided by the City of Cleveland, and
is not necessarily exhaustive.  Questions about specific uses should be directed to the
user's supervisor.

Immediately upon implementation of this policy, supervisors will be responsible to
provide a copy of this policy to, and collect signed consent forms from, all employees
who currently have access to the City's Net or e-mail systems.  Failure to obtain signed
copies to be submitted and maintained by the Division of ITS will result in the
revocation of the Net and e-mail account for the employee.
Any user violating these provisions or applicable local, state, or federal laws is subject
to immediate loss or restrictions of    Net/e-mail privileges, additional disciplinary actions,
up to and including termination of employment, and/or criminal prosecution.

5.2. Consent Agreement. All    City employees, who are provided with access to the City's
e-mail system and/or the Net, are required to abide by the City's policy contained here
and in other relevant documents.

As a condition of employment, all City employees must acknowledge that all computer
and electronic systems, including, but not limited to, electronic mail and Net network
activity are the property of the City, and therefore, they should not consider any activity
to be private.

Current users of    the City's Net or e-mail systems must sign the consent form provided,
within thirty (30) days of receiving a copy of this policy.

All employees must receive appropriate training and sign this agreement prior to
obtaining new access to Net or e-mail systems provided by the City. The employee
must sign the consent form provided in  this policy. By signing the consent form, the
employee or authorized user acknowledges they have received a copy of the policy,

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
33 | P a g e

read it, and understand the City's Policy and the potential penalties for non-compliance.

No employee or authorized user will be granted email or Internet usage
without a signed consent form on file by the appropriate departments as
listed at the end of the consent form.

C-8

April 17, 2009

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
34 | P a g e

City of Cleveland Employee Consent Form for Internet/Intranet and E-  mail
Usage
I,  , have read the City's Policy on Employee Use
of E-Mail and Internet/Intranet ("Net") and agree to comply with all of its terms and
conditions.  I understand and agree that all   computer and electronic activity, including,
but not limited to, electronic mail and Net network activity, being conducted with City
resources is the property of the City.
I acknowledge and consent to the City's right to monitor, log, access,
and review all such activity, with or without notice. I therefore understand and agree
that I have no exp ectation of privacy in the use of these resources. understand that
such City monitoring may include printing and reading all   electronic mail, websites, and
data entered, left, backed up, or stored on the City's computing equipment, whether or
not I have intended its deletion.
Finally, I understand that violation of    this Policy may subject me to disciplinary
action, up to and including, termination of employment.

Employee Name:
Employee ID Number:
Date:

Employee Signature:
Department/Division:

Received By:
(Supervisor or Appointing Authority) Date:

Distribution of Copies: One Copy -  Attention: Department of Human Resources One Copy -
Employee Department File One Copy - Division of Information Technology and Services One
Copy - Employee
C-8-1

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
35 | P a g e

GIFTS AND GRATUITIES POLICY

I. Policy Statement--Pursuant to the Ohio Revised Code, Section 102.03(E)  "no
public official or employee shall solicit or accept anything of    value that is  of    such a
character as to manifest a   substantial and improper influence upon the public
official or employee with respect to that person's duties."

II. Gifts and Gratuities

A. Public officials and employees are strictly prohibited from accepting
any item or items with cumulative value.

B. Individuals who receive gifts are advised to return the gift.

C. Employees may be required to disclose the nature and value of items
accepted from current or potential vendors who do or may do business with
the City.

III. Employee Events--City of    Cleveland employees shall not sponsor parties for their
staff where the costs of which are covered in whole or in part by donations or
receipts from the sale of    tickets to individuals who are doing or seeking to do
business with the City.

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Signature
Chief of Human Resources
_
Title
May 15,2023

Date

C-9

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
36 | P a g e

FUEL SYSTEM POLICY/PROCEDURES
1. Policy Statement

This policy shall ensure the efficient, responsible use of    fuel for City purposes and
complements the City of Cleveland Vehicle Use Policy.

The Division of Motor Vehicle Maintenance (MVM) is responsible for the overall
management, operation and maintenance of the city's fuel system. This includes
purchasing and delivery of fuel, the automated fuel dispensing system, fuel cards,
dispensing pumps and storage tanks.
2. Driver Identification Cards, Vehicle Cards and Miscellaneous Cards

a. Any driver required to fuel vehicles or equipment will be issued a Driver's
Identification Card, upon request (See Form "Employee Fuel Card Request",
C-10-1).     This card along with the Vehicle Card will be used to dispense fuel.

b. Request for    issuance of a driver identification card must be approved by the
driver's Commissioner.

c. Lost or stolen identification or vehicle cards must be reported to the supervisor
and MVM, immediately, to cancel the card and reissue if needed. Transactions
made on unreported lost or stolen cards will be the responsibility of the
employee whom the card was issued.

d. Replacement of a lost or deactivated card must be approved by the driver's
Commissioner.

e. A   $15.00 fee must be paid by the employee to replace a   lost, stolen or damaged
card.

f. Cards that do not operate properly can be replaced by bringing the card to the
Motor Vehicle Maintenance Fuel office and completing the appropriate form.

g. Driver ID cards are to remain in   the possession of the driver assigned. It is  a
violation of this policy for an employee to knowingly allow use of the driver
identification card by any other person.

h. The employee is  responsible for all   fuel transactions made with the driver card
that has been assigned.

C-10

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
37 | P a g e

i. Each City of Cleveland vehicle has a   vehicle card (fuel card) assigned to it.  This
card is to be used only for the vehicle that it is assigned to and must be kept
with the vehicle at all times. It is a violation of this policy for an employee to
knowingly allow use of the vehicle card by any other person or vehicle.

j. Vehicle cards are issued by the type of fuel that the vehicle consumes. (gasoline
or diesel) Vehicles that utilize both diesel and gas carry a special code or number
and are issued two separate cards, one vehicle card and one miscellaneous card
with a unique ID that identifies the vehicle.  Miscellaneous cards issued for a
specific vehicle cannot be used for other purposes.

k. Miscellaneous fuel cards will be issued only by MVM upon request of the
Commissioner of    the user division. Miscellaneous fuel cards will be used only for
small portable equipment or containers. Divisions that have been issued
miscellaneous cards should maintain a log that contains the date when the card
was used, the quantity, the purpose and the name of the user or employee. At
the end of each day the user or employee should turn over the card to the
department/division appointed custodian for safekeeping.

l. On termination of employment, the identification card must be turned in to the
supervisor.  Transactions made on unreturned cards will be the responsibility of
the former employee to whom the card was issued.

m. Refueling of one or more cars by an employee on behalf of other employees is
strictly prohibited under this policy.  City policy does not permit complimentary
fill  -ups of one employee's assigned vehicle by another employee. Each employee
must obtain his or her own fuel using the fuel cards issued for that purpose.

3. Fueling Procedures/ Rules

a. Go to an approved city of Cleveland fueling site. (See Report "Fuel Site Location",
C-10-2)

b. Follow the prompts at the pump

c. Swipe vehicle card and driver identification card

d. Enter odometer / hour meter reading. When fueling off road equipment,
generators and compressors, the hour meter reading must be used in   place of an
odometer reading.

e. Enter fuel terminal number
C-10

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
38 | P a g e

f. Pump fuel

g. Miscellaneous Fuel Cards (used for  filling equipment) will be set to allow a
maximum of 5 gallons per fueling.

h. A   log shall be maintained by the divisions for each Miscellaneous Fuel Card
noting the location, date and purpose for the transaction.

i. Vehicles/individuals will not be permitted to refuel more than twice a   day.

j. Exceptions for number of times a day refueling can occur and the 5 gallon limit
for miscellaneous cards will be reviewed on a case specific bases. A written
justification and list of individuals must be submitted by each department
director to the Director of Public Service for approval.  These lists will be kept on
file at MVM and Public Service.

k. Vehicles must be refueled prior to the fuel gauge going below one quarter (¼) of
a tank, minimum.

4. Odometer Reading Corrections

a. Corrections made to the odometer reading of    a   vehicle will not be made over the
phone unless validated by a supervisor.

b. If the mileage cannot be validated by a supervisor, then the vehicle must be
brought to 4150 East 49th Street to be validated by Motor Vehicle Maintenance.

c. Anytime a fueling odometer error occurs, an Odometer Error Correction Form (C-
10-3) must be completed and signed by the MVM employee who corrects the
error and the employee who requested the correction.

d. The Odometer Error Correction Form will be filed at MVM and a copy will be sent
to the commissioner/chief of the Division and the individual assigned by each
Division to review the monthly fuel usage report.

e. Departments/Divisions will be supplied with a list    of    contact names to make
needed corrections in the event a vehicle has an odometer error outside of
normal business hours.

5. Fuel Tracking & Accountability

a. In order to track fuel usage, prevent system abuse, and assure the proper billing
of each division/department, the division of MVM generates monthly inter-
C-10

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
39 | P a g e

department service charge/fuel usage reports for all   user divisions/departments.

b. These reports will be distributed by MVM by the 15th of each month for the
previous month to all user divisions/departments.

c. The Commissioner/Director of    each division/department will appoint an individual
as fuel monitor who is responsible for reviewing the Monthly Fuel Usage Report,
to identify any irregularities, discrepancies, or inaccuracies.

d. Each Commissioner/Director must submit the name and phone number of the
Fuel Monitor to the Commissioner of MVM.

e. The Commissioner of MVM will maintain a   list    of Fuel Monitors and distribute the
monthly reports identified herein, directly to them.

f. Any change in   the Fuel Monitor shall be reported to the Commissioner of MVM as
soon as the change occurs.

g. In addition to Divisional/Departmental reviews, MVM will conduct citywide spot
audits of the Fuel Usage Reports following the policy detailed herein.

h. Any irregularities, discrepancies, or inaccuracies identified must be reported in
writing to the attention of the appointing authority of the division with the
problem.

i. The appointing authority of the division should forward this information to the
appropriate director.

6. City Divisions'/Departments' Responsibilities:

a. Each Fuel Monitor should review the Monthly Fuel Usage Reports to identify any
irregularities, discrepancies, or inaccuracies.

b. Specific focus should be given to amount of fuel dispensed, low miles per gallon
(MPG), frequency of transactions, and time of day and place where fueling
occurred relative to an employee's job duties. Fuel consumption standards shall
be provided with the Monthly Fuel Usage Report.

c. A   Fuel Transaction Review Form must be completed each month by the Fuel
Monitor to identify the issues detailed within this policy.

C-10

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
40 | P a g e

d. The Fuel Transaction Review Form must be completed and signed whether or
not any problems are identified. This form must be returned to the Fleet Data
Manager at the Division of Motor Vehicle Maintenance by the last business day of
each month.

e. Cards assigned to employees that are transferred, retired or terminated must be
returned to the Division of Motor Vehicle maintenance as part of the exit
interview process. MVM will deactivate the driver's ID cards.

f. Vehicles transferred, retired from service or loaned to other departments should
be reported promptly so that the applicable transfer form can be completed and
submitted to MVM. Vehicle cards of retired vehicles will be deactivated.
Transferred/loaned vehicles will be noted by MVM so that fuel charges will be
made to appropriate department.

g. Each department/division should maintain a daily vehicle use log (See Report
"City Wide Mileage", C-10-4) or vehicle trip ticket to keep track of vehicle and
fuel use and be able to compare or validate the monthly MVM monthly report.
The vehicle log or trip ticket should contain at the minimum the date of    use, the
vehicle number, the name of employee, beginning and end mileage, quantity of
gas, and location of fuel station.

h. All    drivers of City owned vehicles are subject to this policy and any other policies
pertaining to the use of city property.

i. Direct any questions regarding the Monthly Fuel Usage Reports to Fleet Data
Manager at (216) 420-8112.

7. Policy/Procedure Violations

a. Any violation of    this policy and/or improper use of    City fuel will result in
disciplinary action up to and including termination.

b. If theft is  identified, a   police investigation will take place and criminal charges
will be made where appropriate.

c. The City will use all   legal means available to recover the costs of    misappropriated
fuel.

C-10

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
41 | P a g e

C-10

August 1, 2008

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
42 | P a g e

CITY OF   CLEVELAND
Department of Public Service
Division of    Motor Vehicle Maintenance
Employee Fuel Card Request Form

Name & Employee ID Number:
(Please print clearly)

Division/ Acct Code:
Department:
Payroll Number:
Reason a new card is needed:

Print Name Signature

Date Card Issued:
Issued By:

Revised: 7/08
C-10-1

43 | P a g e

DIVISION OF MOTOR VEHICLE MAINTENANCE
AUTOMATED FUEL DISPENSING SYSTEM LOCATIONS

SITE
NO.

SITE NAME

LOCATION

TYPES OF FUEL
(Diesel=DSL
Unleaded=UNL
Natural Gas=CNG)

0
GLENVILLE SERVICE CENTER
GLENVILLE SERVICE CENTER 10801 LEUER AVENUE DSL
1
FIRE STATION 30
ENGINE #30 10225 ST. CLAIR AVE. DSL / UNL
2
FIRE STATION 10
ENGINE #10 1935 EAST 101 ST DSL / UNL
3
E. 65TH ST SERVICE CENTER
EAST 65TH 2301 EAST 65TH ST DSL / UNL
4
FIRE STATION 13
ENGINE #13 4950 BROADWAY AVE DSL / UNL
5
PARKS MAINTENANCE
JOHNSTON PARKWAY 4701 JOHNSTON PARKWAY DSL / UNL
6
CLEVELAND PUBLIC POWER
CPP W. 41
ST
 2490 WEST 41ST ST DSL / UNL / CNG
7
RIDGE ROAD SERVICE CENTER
RIDGE ROAD 3727 RIDGE ROAD DSL / UNL
8
CLEVELAND HOPKINS INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT
HOPKINS 5300 RIVERSIDE DRIVE - AIRPORT ACCESS DSL / UNL
10
6TH DISTRICT POLICE STATION
POLICE 6
TH
 881 E. 152ND ST UNL
11
4TH DISTRICT POLICE STATION
POLICE 4
TH
 9333 KINSMAN RD UNL
12
BURKE AIRPORT
BURKE AIRPORT 1501 N. MARGINAL RD. - AIRPORT ACCESS DSL / UNL
13
FIRE STATION 20
ENGINE #20 3765 PEARL ROAD DSL / UNL
14
2ND DISTRICT POLICE STATION
POLICE 2
ND
 3481 FULTON ROAD UNL
15
1ST DISTRICT POLICE STATION
POLICE 1
ST
 3895 W. 130TH ST UNL
16
JOSEPH STAMPS SERVICE CENTER
STAMPS CENTER 4150 S. MARGINAL RD DSL / UNL
18
STRONGSVILLE PUMPING STATION
STRONGSVILLE 18640 PEARL RD UNL
21
HIGHLAND PARK GOLF COURSE
HIGHLAND PK CEMETERY 22100 CHAGRIN BLVD UNL
22
CROWN PUMPING STATION
CROWN PUMP 955 CLAGUE RD UNL / DSL
26
CLEVELAND PUBLIC POWER
CPP E. 140
TH
 743 E. 140TH ST. DSL / UNL
27
TWINSBURG PUMPING STATION
TWINSBURG WATER 8021 BAVARIA RD DSL / UNL
28
PARKS MAINTENANCE FACILITY
HUMPHREY PK 207 E. 161 ST. DSL / UNL
29
HARVARD YARDS WATER
WATER DEPT 4600 HARVARD AVE DSL / UNL

C-10-2

44 | P a g e

CITY OF   CLEVELAND
Department of    Public Service
Division of    Motor Vehicle Maintenance
Odometer Correction Form

Date:
Department:
Division:
Vehicle Type:
Vehicle Code:
License Number:

Reason for Correction:

Current Odometer Reading:

Requested By:
Print Name     Signature

Employee ID Number

Corrected By:
Print Name Signature

Employee ID Number

Site going to fueling at:

Revised 7/08
C-10-3

45 | P a g e

C-10-4

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
46 | P a g e

HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS (H.I.V.) ACQUIRED IMMUNE
DEFICIENCY SYNDROME (A.I.D.S.) W ORKP L ACE P OL I CY

I. General Policy

A. The City is  committed to providing service to all   citizens regardless of    their
Human Immunodeficiency Virus (H.I.V.) status.  In support of this
commitment, the City will disseminate accurate and current information to all
employees.

B. In    those special occupational settings where there may be a  potential risk of
exposure to H.I.V., the City of   Cleveland will provide specific, ongoing education
and training to reinforce appropriate infection control procedures and ensure that
they are implemented.

II. Specific Policies

A. People with A.I.D.S. or H.I.V. infection are entitled to the same rights and
opportunities as people with other serious or life-threatening illnesses. Any
employee known to have A.I.D.S. or conditions associated with H.I.V. who is
able to continue safe and effective work performance shal be entitled to
remain in   the same job classification and work location unless it  is  medically
determined that this would significantly threaten the health of    the public, the
employee or his   or her co-workers.

B. Any employee who encounters H.I.V. exposure will be offered anonymous or
confidential testing with pre- and post-test counseling as well as access to
confidential clinical support services and additional counseling.

C. Some employees work in   occupations that may put them at greater risk of
H.I.V. infection (e.g., medical facilities, laboratories, security personnel who
might come in   contact with blood, etc.). These employees may be required
to attend training sessions with special emphasis on the use of   universal
precautions where there might be exposure to blood-borne pathogens.

D. The same strict confidentiality requirements that apply to any medical
disclosure shall be followed for H.I.V. or A.I.D.S -related health problems in   the
City's workforce. H.I.V.-infected employees may request a confidential benefit
consultation to assist them in  managing health, leave and other benefits.

C-11

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
47 | P a g e

E. The City will provide employees with sensitive, accurate and up-to-date
education about risk-reduction in their personal lives by sponsoring
educational presentations about A.I.D.S. and H.I.V.-related conditions and
prevention. This effort is  designed to reduce risk-taking and misinformation'
among employees and to offer current and accurate information about this
important public health concern. Cleveland Department of Public Health
educators in  conjunction with the Department of Human Resources will be
responsible for planning and conducting such presentations.

F. Management will demonstrate sensitivity to the possibility that employees with
H.I.V. or A.I.D.S. and their co-workers may be subject to particular stress or
concerns about this disability. Managers and supervisors will receive training that
includes dealing with issues of confidentiality, how to approach any necessary
counseling and referrals and how to help a  chronically ill  employee continue
working and remain productive.

G. This policy will be reviewed on a regular basis. Recommendations will be
made as needed to ensure compliance with the most current
epidemiologically-accepted facts about A.I.D.S. and H.I.V.-related
conditions.

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Signature
Director of Personnel & HR
_
Title
March 17, 2008

Date

C-11

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-12
48 | P a g e

CITY TICKET PROCEDURES

The following procedures will be followed when tickets are issued to employees who
drive City vehicles:

I. POLICY STATEMENT
1. It is  the policy of the City of Cleveland that employees adhere to all   traffic
ordinances in the performance of their City work.
2. The responsible party is  identified as either the responsible employee or,   if
unknown, the Commissioner of the Division for failure to keep a tracking
log of the use of assigned City vehicles.

II. EMPLOYEE RESPONSIBILITY
1. City employees shall adhere to all   traffic ordinances and regulations while
they are performing their duties and while operating City vehicles.
2. Employees are responsible for any tickets they incur for parking, moving
violations or any other traffic ticket issued to the employee when the
employee was provided with the necessary items to operate the City
vehicle to do his/her job.
3. Employees must pay the ticket or file for    an Ex-Parte hearing.
4. The employee is required to pay the fine within the time period allowed,
following the same procedures available to any citizen who is  served with
a ticket.
5. The employee must provide proof of payment to the director or director's
designee no later than the next working day after the expiration of the
grace period given for the ticket.
6. If an employee believes he/she has received a   traffic ticket in connection
with the operation of a City vehicle in the course of his/ her duties and
that the ticket is issued in error or that the ticket is improper, the
employee may challenge that ticket through the appeal process for  traffic
tickets as noted below.
7. Any employee who violates or fails to adhere to any provision of this
policy statement is subject to disciplinary procedures.
8. An employee who continues to incur traffic tickets while driving a City
vehicle in the performance of his/her duties is subject to progressive
discipline.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-12
49 | P a g e

9. If the employee fails to pay the ticket within the specified time, and there
is no appeal pending, the cost of the ticket will be deducted from the
employee's pay.
i. If   an employee has one unpaid ticket, the cost will be deducted
from one paycheck.
ii. If an employee has more than one unpaid ticket, the total dollar
amount of the tickets will be divided by the number of tickets to
spread it out. This equal amount will be deducted for the number
of    paychecks equal to the number of tickets. (3 tickets: $100, $160
& $25=$285/3tickets=$95/per paycheck for 3 pays.)

III. Departmental Responsibilities
A. Each department shall keep track of the use of its City vehicles and be
able to determine which employee within the department is  responsible
for a ticket received on a department vehicle.
B. The director shall assign an appropriate manager or managers to ensure
that all   use of City vehicles is  logged and the employee/driver of    the City
vehicle is identified for each vehicle use.
1. The manager in  charge of the vehicle-use log is  to be
provided with this policy.
2. The manager in  charge of the vehicle-use log is  expressly
advised that the log is subject to audit.
3. A   manager assigned to administer the vehicle-use log is
expressly advised that failure to record vehicle use and
maintain the vehicle-use log is grounds for discipline.

C. The responsible party is  identified as either the responsible employee or,   if
the employee is unknown, the Commissioner of the Division for failure to
keep a tracking log of the use of assigned City vehicles. The cost of the
ticket will then come out of the Commissioner's pay.
D. It is  the Director or designee's responsibility to distribute tickets received
from Motor Vehicle Maintenance to the responsible employee. Tickets
should be distributed promptly so that the employee receives maximum
benefit of the time limits within which payment must be received. The
Director or designee shall note the payment due date.
E. It is the Director's or designee's responsibility to follow up with the
employee if  proof of payment of the ticket is  not received on the next
business day following expiration of the payment period.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
50 | P a g e

F. An employee who fails to pay the ticket as directed is  subject to
progressive discipline.
G. An employee who continues to incur traffic tickets while driving a City
vehicle in the performance of his/her duties is subject to progressive
discipline.

Note: Red light camera violations can be seen at http://www.public.cite-web.com/
Put the ticket number in  (citation/violation #) excluding the letter, and the last number
for the citation number and then 9 digit numbers for the pin for future use.

IV. Appeal Procedure
Any City employee who receives a   ticket while on the job driving or responsible for a
City vehicle and wishes to appeal it must abide by the following procedures:

1. Employees must file for  Ex-Parte or pay the ticket.
2. All    tickets must be contested within 15 calendar days of    the date of issue.
3. All    department/division(s) will be notified weekly that there is/are outstanding
ticket(s).
4. Ex-Parte Hearing Procedure: (see attached form)
• If   the employee has an Ex-Parte procedure, the ticket payment is  placed
on HOLD pending the outcome of that judgment.
• If   the outcome of the Ex-Parte proceeding is  in  the employee's favor,
the ticket will be dismissed.
• If the result of the Ex-Parte hearing is not in the employee's favor, the
ticket remains the employee's responsibility and the employee is  notified
that payment of the ticket is due immediately.
• If   the Ex-Parte procedure is  not initiated and payment is  not made, the
amount of the ticket will be deducted from the employee's check.
5. All    Ex-Parte requests must include the original ticket issued.

V. Definitions
A. "Employee" means any full-time, part-time or seasonal employee or
officer of the City of Cleveland under permanent or temporary
appointment, and includes volunteers and interns.
B. "Director" means the director of the department or his    or her designee.
In the case of boards, commissions and offices, "director" refers to the
appointing authority or their designee.

C-12

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
51 | P a g e

C. "Department" includes boards, commissions and offices of the City of
Cleveland.

D. "Ex-Parte" refers to the procedure conducted by the Parking Violations
Bureau that determines whether a ticket will be waived.

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Signature
Interim Director Personnel & HR

Title
March 19, 2010

Date

C-12

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
52 | P a g e

CITY OF CLEVELAND
PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU/PHOTO SAFETY DIVISION
1200 Ontario Street
Cleveland, Ohio 44113
(216)664-4744

CITIZEN STATEMENT:

NAME:    DATE:
ADDRESS:
CITY  STATE ZIP
TICKET NO. ISSUE DATE  LIC.PLATE
Phone E-mail

IN-PERSON HEARING REQUEST
(You will be scheduled to    appear in   person before a Hearing Examiner. You will be notified by mail of the date you
will be required to appear.)

EX-PARTE HEARING REQUEST
(Explanation of the circumstances surrounding infraction without an in-  person appearance. Any evidence should be
attached.)

Check here if vehicle towed

C-12-1

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
53 | P a g e

C-12-2

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-13
54 | P a g e

REQUIRED LICENSES FOR OPERATION OF CITY VEHICLES

I. General Provisions

A. Obtaining an Operator's License or a   Commercial Driver's License

The job duties of    certain classifications in  the City of Cleveland require the
operation of one or more types of City motorized vehicles. The provisions
contained herein shall be construed as the City's policy with respect to the
operation of such vehicles, specifically with respect to licenses which may
be a requirement thereto.

B. Verification Requirements-Commercial Driver's License and Operator's
License

No employee shall be allowed to operate a   City of Cleveland motor vehicle
unless he or she has obtained the valid license which is required to
operate a particular vehicle. In addition, the employee shall provide his or
her immediate supervisor with verification of their valid license
immediately upon request. Failure to provide such verification shall
disqualify an employee from operating any City motor vehicle for which a
specific license is required and may subject the employee to disciplinary
action. The City will verify an employee's driver's license status every six
(6) months for all   employees using vehicles for City business.

II. Notification of Driving Violations Procedure

A. Commercial Driver's License

1. An employee who is  required to operate a   motor vehicle as a   part of    his    or
her duties on behalf of the City shall be required to notify his or her
immediate supervisor of any conviction, plea of no contest and/or
payment of waiver related to a driving offense (including speeding
tickets), with the exception of non-moving violations (i.e., parking tickets,
etc.), within 72 hours of such conviction. Furthermore, such an employee
shall be required to notify his or her immediate supervisor of any motor
vehicle accidents in which he or she is involved, including personal
vehicle, within 72 hours of the occurrence. An employee's failure to timely
and/or accurately report, as provided herein, shall render such employee
subject to appropriate disciplinary action, and the employee will be held
personally liable for    any fines incurred by the City as a   consequence of    the
employee's failure to timely and/or accurately report.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-13
55 | P a g e

2. Notwithstanding the above, if an employee holds a position for the City
whose duties require that the employee have a   valid Commercial Driver's
license (CDL), he or she shall be required to notify his or her immediate
supervisor upon any of the following:

a. the suspension, revocation or cancellation of his    or her CDL
by any state of foreign jurisdiction;

b. the loss of his or her privilege to drive, including any
disqualification from driving a commercial motor vehicle in
any state or foreign jurisdiction for any period of time; or

c. that he or she is  subject to an out of service order.

3. The information outlined in  a. - c. above must be submitted to an
affected employee's immediate supervisor or designee before the
end of the business day following the day on which the employee
received notice of the action. Failure to comply with this
requirement in a timely manner may result in disciplinary action
being taken against the affected employee, up to and including
pending discharge.
III. Commercial Driver's License (CDL) Requirements

A. If   an employee's Commercial Driver's License is  suspended or revoked, or
if   the employee is  otherwise disqualified for driving-related infractions, he
or she may be given a 90 day period (unless otherwise provided in his or
her collective bargaining agreement) within which to re-qualify for the
CDL. An employee's eligibility for consideration for alternative duties or
placement in other vacant positions during said 90 day period as
contemplated herein, an Appointing Authority shall consider such factors
as:
1. an employee's attendance and discipline record

2. objective and measurable job-related factors that indicate an
employee's job performance relative to other, similarly situated
employees

3. performance evaluations conducted over the previous two year
period

4. the overall qualifications and abilities of the employee to perform
the duties in question.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
56 | P a g e

B. During said 90 day period, the Appointing Authority shall have the
discretion to assign such an employee to other duties in his or her
respective bargaining unit for which the employee may be qualified, if
such alternative duties are available and the Appointing Authority
determines that the employee is  qualified and capable of performing the
essential functions of the position.

C. If   no such alternative exists, or the Appointing Authority determines that
the employee is not qualified or capable of performing the essential
functions of the position, or if after the 90 day period the employee
cannot or does not re-qualify for the suspended/revoked CDL, the
Appointing Authority shall have the option to either:

1. Place the employee on an unpaid leave of absence not to exceed
six   months, after which the employee shall be terminated if   he or
she fails to obtain a CDL within that time, or;

2. Find the employee a vacant, lower position within his or her
bargaining unit into which the employee can be reclassified and
appointed.

IV. Notification of Driving Violation Procedure

A. Operator's License

1. An employee who is required to operate a motor vehicle as part of
his or her duties on behalf of the City shall be required to notify his
or her immediate supervisor of any conviction, plea of    no contest and
payment of    waiver related to an offense, with the exception of nonmoving
violations, within 72 hours of the offense. Furthermore; such an employee
shall be required to notify his or her immediate supervisor of any motor
vehicle accidents involving the employee's personal vehicle within 72
hours of the occurrence. Failure of an employee to timely and/or
accurately report, as provided above, may result in disciplinary action up
to and including suspension pending discharge.

2. If an employee's driver's license is suspended or revoked or if the
employee is otherwise disqualified from driving for driving-related
infractions, the employee may be given alternative duties. For purposes of
determining an employee's eligibility for consideration for alternative
duties or placement in other vacant positions, as contemplated herein, an
Appointing Authority shall consider the same factors as are listed in the
Commercial Driver's License Requirements section, outlined above.
C-13

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
57 | P a g e

Signature

3. During said 90 day period, the Appointing Authority shall have the
discretion to assign such an employee to other duties for  which the
employee may be qualified; if such alternative duties are available
and the Appointing Authority determines that the employee is
qualified and capable of performing the essential functions of the
position.

4. If no such alternative duties exist, or the Appointing Authority
determines that the employee is not qualified or capable of
performing the essential functions of the position, or if   after 90 day
period the employee cannot or does not re-qualify for the
suspended/revoked job-specific license, the employee shall be
terminated from employment with the City.

V. Temporary Employee Provision

A. Individuals who may be hired as replacements for employees who are on
suspension or leave of absence, as provided herein, shall be notified at the
time of their hire that they are being hired on a temporary basis only and that
their period of employment with the City may not exceed the date upon
which such a suspension/leave of absence concludes.

B. Nothing herein shall be construed as an obligation on the City of Cleveland to
create a   vacant position or otherwise alter the job duties of    any City position,
except as cited herein.

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Director of Human Resources

Title
August 31, 2015

Date

C-13

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
58 | P a g e

SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY

The current
Sexual Harassment Policy can be
found under the New Policy
Section of Human Resources (HR)
Policies and Procedures.

*Upon review of all HR Policies and
Procedures a newly user-friendly manual
will be generated and distributed.

C-14

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
59 | P a g e

SOLICITATION AND DISTRIBUTION

I. Policy Statement

A. In order to provide specific rules and regulations for employees and outside
organizations in   the City of Cleveland and all   buildings under the control of the
City Government, the following rules shall apply:

1. Employee No-Solicitation Rule - Any Solicitation by an employee of
another employee on the property of the City of Cleveland, while either
employee is  on his    or her working time when an employee's duties require
that he or she be engaged in work tasks. However, such solicitation is
permitted during non-working time and in non-work areas.

2. Employee No-Distribution Rule - Distribution of any type of literature,
brochures, goods, etc., during working or non-working time in  work areas
is prohibited. Employees will not be permitted to sell crafts, items for
schools, clubs and organizations, during working or non-working time, in
working areas. However employees may distribute goods and written
materials, sell small crafts and other items for schools, clubs and
organizations, during non-working time, in non-work areas.

3. Employee No-Access Rule - Employees are not permitted access to City
offices, service facilities and departments outside normal working hours,
or during an employee's off-duty hours, for the purpose of solicitation,
without the written approval of the Appointing Authority or designee.

4. Non-Employee Solicitation and Distribution - Non-Employees are not
permitted access to City offices or departments, including the interior of
the facilities and other working areas, for the purpose of solicitation
and/or distribution. This Section does not apply to vendors, as defined in
the Definitions section of this policy.

B. Any exceptions to the provisions of this policy shall only be at the express
authorization of the appointing authority.

Definitions - For purposes of the Solicitation and Distribution policy, the following
definitions shall apply:

C-15

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
60 | P a g e

A. Distribution - An act of distributing goods, materials and/or written materials.

B. Employee - Any person in  the employ of City of Cleveland, in   any status.

C. Non-Work Area - Any area on or off an employer's premises not designated as a   work
area.

D. Non-Work Time - Any time during an employee's work day where the employee is
totally relieved of work duties, such as break time and lunch time.  Whether and
employee is  in   paid or unpaid status during these times is  immaterial to the designation
of non-work time shall be limited only to those days on which an employee is not
scheduled to work (he or she is off-duty).

E. Off-Duty Hours - Any time before or after a work shift.

F. Solicitation - An act of requesting an individual to purchase goods, materials or services
or plea for financial contribution.

G. Vendor - Any individual or group engaged in or desiring to engage in the supply of
goods, materials or services to the City and its   Employers, which goods, materials or
services are utilized in the conduct of public business.

H. Work Area - Any office, building or physical location where official business is
transacted and/or operations are being conducted.  This includes any public or private
area where employees are engaged in work activities.

I. Work Time - All    time when an employee's duties require that he or she be engaged in
work tasks, but does not include an employee's own time, such as meal periods,
scheduled breaks and time before or after a work shift.

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Signature
Director of Personnel & HR
_
Title
March 17, 2008

Date

C-15

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
61 | P a g e

VEHICLE-USE POLICY
DEFINITIONS

A. "Accident" is  defined as any intended or unintended event from
which vehicle damage results.

B. "Motor Vehicle" refers to an automobile, truck or other vehicle that is
commonly used on a public roadway.

C. "Vehicle" is  defined as any piece of motorized equipment that is  operated so
that a driver is conveyed from place to place in order to perform job duties.

I. RULES OF OPERATION

A. While engaged in  City business, no employee shall operate any vehicle, whether
City-owned or otherwise, without holding a valid Ohio driver's license. If
required for  the class of vehicle operated, the employee shall hold a   Commercial
Driver's License "CDL".

B. Each employee who operates a   vehicle, City-owned or personal, while engaged
in City business shall submit a photocopy of his or her current Ohio driver's
license, and CDL, if applicable, to the employee's appointing authority.

C. Each employee who may have occasion to operate a vehicle while engaged in
City business shall immediately notify his or her appointing authority of any
change in the employee's driving status, including any suspension, expiration
without renewal, or revocation of driving privileges. If an employee's driver's
license or driving privilege is suspended and he or she is assigned a City-owned
vehicle, the employee shall make immediate arrangements acceptable to the
appointing authority for the return of the City-owned vehicle to the City. An
employee's failure to notify his or her appointing authority of any adverse action
affecting the employee's ability to drive will result in  disciplinary action, up to and
including termination. (See HR Policy C-13 Required Licenses for Operation of
City Vehicles).

D. Each employee shall comply with all City policies and all laws, rules and
regulations concerning the operation of vehicles. Each employee shall
operate a   vehicle in   a safe manner and use defensive driving skills to avoid
accidents with others, as appropriate for the weather conditions, the road
surface, and/or the actions of others.
C-16

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
62 | P a g e

1. An employee who is  involved in  a   motor vehicle accident is  subject to the
Motor Vehicle Accident Procedure (Procedure C-18-1).

2. As provided by State law, if an employee is operating a City vehicle within
the scope of his    or her employment, and if  damages or personal injuries are
sustained by a third party in connection with the operation of the vehicle,
the employee may request, through the employee's appointing authority to
the Director of Law, that the City provide the employee with legal
representation and indemnification. If the employee is operating a vehicle
outside the scope of employment, the employee is not entitled to legal
representation or indemnification by the City. The Director of Law shall
determine in each case whether legal representation and indemnification is
appropriate.

3. An employee who willfully or negligently causes damage to a City of
Cleveland vehicle is  subject to discipline up to and including discharge.

E. An employee shall operate a   City vehicle only while acting within the scope of his
or her employment unless the employee is  authorized to use the vehicle for long-
term regular use as provided in Section V below.

1. Employees are advised that if   an employee operates a   City-owned vehicle
or personal vehicle while outside the scope of his or her employment,
then the employee is personally liable for any damages or injuries
sustained as a result of the operation of the vehicle.

2. Employees are further advised that it is against State law for any
individual to operate a motor vehicle without complying with the Ohio
Financial Responsibility Law, including obtaining appropriate liability
insurance.  An employee may obtain a policy of insurance at his or her
own expense to cover this liability. Employees should be aware that
policies of personal automobile insurance may, and frequently do, exclude
losses sustained during the operation of a City vehicle unless a rider is
purchased.  Employees must check with their own insurance agent or
carrier to determine coverage.
3. If an employee uses a   non-City vehicle while engaged in   City business, the
employee shall carry an automobile-liability policy covering that use.

F. Employees shall follow all   safety policies with respect to operation of motorized
vehicles or equipment including the requirement to wear seat belts while
operating a vehicle on City business. The driver of a City motor vehicle shall
require all occupants of the motor vehicle to do the same.
C-16

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
63 | P a g e

G. Employees are responsible for the security of any City vehicle in   their control. No
employee shall leave a vehicle unlocked or with the keys in the ignition.

H. Employees shall not transport any person other than City employees, or those
with whom the City is conducting business, within a City motor vehicle.
Employees are advised that an employee who is transporting any person other
than a   City employee or those with whom the City is  conducting business, will be
deemed to be acting outside the scope of his or her employment and will be
denied City representation and indemnification for any loss, suit, claim, damage,
bodily, or personal injury that any third party claims or sustains.

I. It is  the policy of the City that employees should use City motor vehicles solely as
transportation for or to conduct the public business of the City and, if authorized
in accordance with Sections IV and V of this policy, for commuting or long-term
general use purposes. Use of a City-owned vehicle for personal use, other than
as may be authorized in Human Resources Policy B-16 is prohibited. An
employee is not acting within the scope of his or her employment when
operating a City-owned vehicle for personal use.  If an employee violates this
policy, the employee will be subject to discipline.

J. Except in   the case in   which an employee has been authorized to use a
commuting vehicle under Human Resources Policy B-16, employees
using a City-owned motor vehicle shall return the vehicle to a designated City
parking lot at the end of the workday.

K. Each employee shall follow the City's Motor Vehicle Accident Procedure
(Procedure C-16-1) for the reporting of any accident while operating a City-
owned motor vehicle and the City's Parking Tickets policy (C-12) if   the employee
receives a parking infraction ticket while operating a City-owned vehicle.

L. Any employee taking a City-owned motor vehicle beyond an adjacent county
(Geauga, Lake, Lorain, Medina, or Summit) must have the pre-approval of his or
her appointing authority, and comply with the City travel policy where applicable.

M. Any employee driving a   City-owned motor vehicle shall obtain all   fuel needed for
the vehicle at a City pump.

N. All    employees using a   vehicle while engaged in   City business shall strictly adhere
to this policy.  Any employee who violates any provision of this policy is subject
to disciplinary action.

C-16

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
64 | P a g e

O. The fueling of city-owned vehicles shall be done in   accordance with the CITY OF
CLEVELAND FUEL SYSTEM POLICY/PROCEDURES (C-10)

II. EFFICIENCY AND CONSERVATION OF RESOURCES
A. Employees are required to operate City of    Cleveland vehicles so that City resources
are conserved and costs associated with vehicle operation are minimized.

1. Employees who operate City of Cleveland vehicles in the course of their
employment are required to use the shortest or most direct route when traveling
on City of Cleveland business.

2. No City of Cleveland vehicle should be used to transport an employee or group of
employees to a lunch or other recreational destination.

3. City crews who work on a remote job site are not permitted to use a   City vehicle
to pick up lunch from a location greater than three miles from the job site.

B. An employee who willfully or negligently causes damage to a   City of    Cleveland
vehicle is subject to discipline up to and including discharge.

1. Vehicle damage that occurs in  the course of business must be immediately
reported by the employee to the supervisor.

2. The driver shall then complete the City of Cleveland accident report (O.W.C.-3)
within twenty-four (24) hours of the accident.

3. Accidents that are not referred to the Motor Vehicle Accident Review Committee
(see procedure C-16-1) must be reviewed by the appointing authority or
designee.

4. In cases where it is believed that driver abuse and/or neglect contributed to
damage to a   vehicle, an incident report shall be completed by the Motor Vehicle
Maintenance unit leader and forwarded to the division superintendent.

5. If in the opinion of the division superintendent, further action is justified, the
report is  to be forwarded to the fleet manager for notification of the appropriate
department or division head and the Office of the Mayor.

6. The fleet manager shall make a   semi-annual report, February and August, to the
Director of Finance and the Director of Public Works that shows reports filed the
cost of abuse/neglect and responses received from the user.
C-16

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
65 | P a g e
C-16

7. If an investigation suggests that a City of Cleveland vehicle was damaged
through employee abuse or neglect, this information may form the basis for
discipline subject to an employee's due process right.

8. The City of Cleveland does not waive the right to seek redress for damages done
to City of Cleveland motor vehicles or motorized equipment.

IV. USE OF PERSONAL VEHICLE; MILEAGE REIMBURSEMENT

i. In the case of an employee not assigned a City-owned vehicle, for whom pool cars are
not available or not practical; such employee may be reimbursed for mileage if
required to use his or her own vehicle to conduct City business. The employee shall
keep mileage records to verify mileage for reimbursement from the City.

ii. Mileage reimbursement will be made in   accordance with Section 171.43 of the
Codified Ordinances or applicable collective bargaining agreement.

iii. While operating a   personal vehicle on City business, the employee shall strictly adhere
to this policy.

V. USE OF CITY OWNED POOL VEHICLES

A. An employee using a   pool car may only travel between the place where the pool car
is kept and the location of official City business is conducted.

B. No employee shall operate a pool car without first signing it out unless his or her
appointing authority has specifically assigned a pool vehicle to such employee.
Departments shall keep records (such as sign-out sheets) showing each use of the
motor vehicle by an employee sufficient to ascertain the date of use, the name of
the employee(s) using the vehicle, the destination of the vehicle, the mileage to
each destination, and the business purpose of the trip.

C. Pool cars shall not be assigned to employees who operate motor vehicles under
Human Resources Policy B-16.

VI. POLICY APPLICABILITY & ENFORCEMENT

This policy applies to the officers and employees of    all   departments, divisions, boards,
commissions, and offices of the City of Cleveland.  Should the City have reason to
believe that any employee is not complying with this policy; the City shall have the
right to request documentation demonstrating that the vehicle was used
appropriately. Failing such documentation, the City reserves the right to revoke
driving privileges or to place the value of the vehicle plus fuel on the employee's

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
66 | P a g e

Form W-2.  Any employee of the City of Cleveland who fails to comply with the policies
and procedures stated in this policy may be subject to disciplinary action.

C-16

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
67 | P a g e

MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT PROCEDURE

I. Definitions
A. "Accident" is  defined as any intended or unintended event from which vehicle
damage results.
B. "Motor Vehicle" refers to an automobile, truck or other vehicle that is  commonly
used on a public roadway.
C. "Vehicle" is  defined as any piece of motorized equipment that is  operated so that
a driver is conveyed from place to place in order to perform job duties.

II. Policy-Employees are required to adhere to department/division safety policies when
operating vehicles or motor vehicles on the job.

III. Motor Vehicle Accident Procedure--The following are the procedures to be followed
for the reporting of    motor vehicle accidents involving the use of City owned vehicles/motorized
equipment by employees.

A. The employee/driver ("driver") shall, immediately following a
motor vehicle accident on a public highway, street or public place, contact  the
Cleveland Police Department, (or other appropriate law enforcement agency), and
have a police report made of the accident.  The driver must then make certain that
a   police report (OH-1) is  filed. If the Cleveland Police do not arrive at the scene the
employee/driver must proceed to the Police District closest to the accident location,
or follow the directions of the appropriate law enforcement agency.

B. The driver shall secure names and addresses of all persons involved. If   any persons
are injured in the accident, the driver will find out to which hospital they were
transported or referred or note the name/number of the transporting ambulance
company and/or EMS Unit.

C. The driver shall give to the other party his    or her name, department/division where
he or she works and the license number of    the vehicle.  He or she shall not discuss
the question of liability with any party or make any statement, whether oral or
written, regarding the accident, except to a member of the appropriate law
enforcement agency, the city Law Department or staff member from the Offices of
Risk Management and of Workers' Compensation.

D. The driver shall get the names, addresses and phone numbers of witnesses to the
accident and, if possible, signed statements. If the identity of the other driver is in
doubt, securing signed witness statements should be left to the Law Department.  If
witnesses will not offer statements, the driver should note their license numbers.
C-16-1

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
68 | P a g e

E. The driver shall contact his or her immediate supervisor, at the earliest possible
moment, preferably after contacting the appropriate law enforcement agency,
stating the location of    the accident, personal injuries, and nature of    the damage to
the motor vehicle(s).

F. If an employee is injured, the employee should inform the supervisor immediately.
If the employee is  subject to post-accident testing, the employee must report to the
designated testing facility for post-accident drug/alcohol testing in accordance with
Human Resources Policy C-20 and the applicable CBA.  The employee's supervisor
must accompany the employee to the testing facility.

G. Upon fulfilling the requirements of filing a police report, the driver shall then
complete, the City of Cleveland's accident report (entitled O.W.C.-3) within twenty-
four (24) hours of the accident.  This report will be received and reviewed by his or
her immediate supervisor.  If the driver is unable to complete the OH-1 or O.W. C.-
3, due to the severity of injury resulting from the accident, the supervisor shall assist
with the reporting process and make certain that the city report and O.W.C.-3 are
filed within twenty-four (24) hours after the accident.

H. The driver must describe in detail the manner in which the accident occurred and
the damage done to all   vehicles and property when filling out the O.W.C-3 report.  If
necessary, the driver should attach an addendum to the O.W.C.-3 report in order to
report all relevant information.

I. The O.W.C.-3 along with the O.W.C.-4 will be forwarded by the supervisor to the
Office of Workers Compensation within twenty-four (24) hours of the accident.  The
Cleveland Police Department shall also forward to the claims section of the Law
Department a copy of the police report (OH-1) within ten (10) days after the motor
vehicle accident.  If the accident occurs outside of the Cleveland Police Department
jurisdiction, the claims section of the Law Department will obtain a copy of the
accident report from the applicable law enforcement agency.  The Office of Workers
Compensation will then
send copies of    all   relevant documents to the divisional authority, Motor Vehicle
Maintenance, and the Law Department.

J. A city vehicle damaged in an accident must be taken to the nearest city garage
for inspection and a cost estimate repair report.  This must be done as quickly as
possible after the accident. If an accident is allegedly caused by a mechanical
failure of said City equipment or vehicle, an assessment should be done as to
how to safely convey the equipment/vehicle to Motor Vehicle Maintenance for
analysis and repair.
C-16-1

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies

K. Any employee who fails to comply with these instructions may be subject
to departmental or divisional disciplinary measures by his or her appointing
authority. These instructions were established to protect both the employee and
the City of Cleveland.

IV. Employee Accident Review Committee

A. The Motor Vehicle Accident Review Committee will be convened to investigate all
motor vehicle accidents (except those involving public safety vehicles on
emergency call pursuant to Ohio Revised Code Section 2744.02 (B) (1) (a)-(c)
and review the conduct of the City of Cleveland employee/driver.

B. The committee shall include a representative from the following
departments/divisions:

1. Office of    Risk Management
2. Division of    Motor Vehicle Maintenance
3. Office of Workers' Compensation
4. Division of    Police, Traffic Unit (when feasible)
5. Law Department
6. Divisional Representation - the divisional representation would attend the
review meetings only when the discussion affects that particular division.
This individual would serve in an informational capacity and would not
vote.

The composition of    the committee is  at the discretion of the Risk Manager.  Any
addition, deletion, or modification to of committee members will be solely the
decision of the city's Risk Manager.

C. The Motor Vehicle Accident Review Committee shall evaluate all the
documentation generated from an accident, including the OH-1, O.W.C.-3,
O.W.C.-4 and cost estimate repair reports.  The Committee, upon review, will
make a   determination as to whether the employee/driver's conduct contributed
to the accident and whether the accident was preventable or non-preventable.
Upon making a determination, the committee will report its' findings to the
appointing authority.   The appointing authority should defer administering any
discipline until the committee issues its findings.

D. f the committee determines the employee misconduct may have been a   cause of
the accident, within forty-eight (48) hours of    providing such determination to the
applicable appointing authority, the appointing authority shall issue a written
notice to the employee that a pre-disciplinary conference will be conducted in
71 | P a g e
C-16-1

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
72 | P a g e

C-16-1

regard to the matter.  The notice of pre-disciplinary conference will contain the
date of the hearing and cite any ascertained potential rule violations. If
applicable, a copy of the pre-disciplinary notice will also be provided to the
affected employees union representative.

E. Subsequent to the pre-disciplinary conference, the appointing authority will, if
mandated by the findings and upon conferring with Labor Relations, issue a
charge letter to notify the employee of any disciplinary action.

F. If   it  has been determined that the motor vehicle accident was preventable, but
there is  no indication of misconduct on the part of the employee, the following
schedule will be followed in the administration of appropriate discipline:

1. First Offense - Written reprimand

2. Second Offense - Three (3) day suspension without
Pay.

3. Third Offense - Ten (10) day suspension without
pay.

4. Fourth Offense - Discharge

If it  has been determined that the motor vehicle accident was preventable, but there is  no
indication of misconduct on the part of the employee, however there are other attendant
circumstances and the city driver's conduct partially contributed to the occurrence of the
motor vehicle accident, the following schedule will be followed in the administration of
appropriate discipline:

1. First Offense - Written reprimand

2. Second Offense - One (1) day suspension without
pay and instructional training.

3. Third Offense - Three (3) day suspension without
pay and instructional training.

4. Fourth Offense - Five (5) day suspension without
pay and instructional training.

5. Fifth Offense - Ten (10) day suspension without
pay and instructional training.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-16-1
73 | P a g e

6. Sixth Offense - Discharge

G. Upon review of    the facts surrounding a   preventable accident, if it is determined
that an affected employee contributed to said accident through flagrant and /or
willful misconduct, or lack of regard for    established safety rules/procedures, the
schedule below will be followed in the administration of appropriate discipline.

1. First Offense - Minimum ten (10) day suspension
without pay, up to and including discharge.

2. Second Offense - Discharge

V. Accident Report Classifications

A. As part of its function to review all motor vehicle accidents involving City
of Cleveland vehicles within its jurisdiction, the Motor Vehicle Accident
Review Committee will also classify all motor vehicle accidents for
reporting purposes.  The "classification" process is  to focus on the conduct
of the driver and whether he or she could have done anything to prevent
the motor vehicle accident, regardless of adverse weather or road
conditions or the unsafe acts of other drivers or pedestrians. This is the
basis upon which a driver's performance will be analyzed and its
classification determined.  It is in no way related to liability or culpability.
the purpose of classifying the motor vehicle accident is to promote safe
driving principles among city employees and to protect city property.

B. After careful consideration of the facts, the Motor Vehicle Accident Review
Committee must classify every motor vehicle accident into one (1) of
three (3) classifications, which are as follows:

1. "A" Accident - Use "A" classification if the driver could have
prevented the accident.  The driver's conduct contributed to the
occurrence of    the motor vehicle accident.  Usage of a   mobile phone
or radio while operating a vehicle will be construed as a
preventable accident.

2. "B" Accident - Use "B" classification where there are other
attendant circumstances and the city driver's conduct partially
contributed to the occurrence of    the motor vehicle accident.  For
purposes of classification, this type of accident is nonetheless
deemed as being preventable.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-16-1
74 | P a g e

3. "C" Accident - Use "C" classification where a   city vehicle is  involved
in an accident as a result of the other driver's conduct or
circumstances. This is considered a   non-preventable accident. The
city driver's conduct did not contribute in any manner to the
accident.

VI. Accident Report Categories

The following categories describe possible accident situations. The Employee Accident
Review Committee must select the appropriate category (ies) number (s)  based on the
facts of the particular accident being reviewed.

Motorist
01 None
02 Failure to Yield
03 Ran Red Light, or Stop Sign
04 Exceeded Speed Limit
05 Unsafe Speed
06 Improper Turn
07 Left of Center

08 Followed Too Closely/ACDA
09 Improper Lane Change/Drove off Road/ Improper Passing
10 Improper Backing
11 Improper Start from Parked Position
12 Stopped or Parked Illegally
13 Operating Vehicle in  Erratic, Reckless, Careless, Negligent or Aggressive
Manner
14 Swerving To Avoid (Due To Wind, Slippery Surface, Vehicle, Object, Non-
Motorist in Roadway)
15 Failure to Control
16 Vision Obstruction
17 Driver Inattention (Including usage of mobile phones or radio operation
while driving)
18 Fatigue/Asleep
19 Operating Defective Equipment
20 Load Shifting/Falling/Spilling
21 Other Improper Action
22 Unknown

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-16-1
75 | P a g e

Non-Motorist
23 None
24 Improper Crossing
25 Darting
26 Lying and/Or Illegally In    Roadway
27 Failure to Yield Right Of   Way
28 Not Visible (Dark Clothing)
29 Inattentive
30 Failure to Obey Traffic Signs, Signals, or Officer
31 Wrong Side of    the Road
32 Other
33 Unknown

VII. Vehicle Damage Policy- An employee who willfully or negligently causes damage
to a City of Cleveland vehicle is subject to discipline up to and including discharge.
A. Vehicle damage that occurs in  the course of business must be immediately
reported by the employee to the supervisor.
B. The driver shall then complete, the City of Cleveland's accident report
(entitled O.W.C.-3) within twenty-four (24) hours of the accident.
C. Accidents that are not referred to the Motor Vehicle Accident Review
Committee must be reviewed by the appointing authority or designee.
D. Information received from the Division of Motor Vehicle Maintenance or from
another repair facility that suggests that a City of Cleveland vehicle was
damaged through employee abuse or neglect may form a basis for
disciplinary action.
E. Where there is a finding that an employee was responsible for vehicle
damage through the employee's willful act or gross negligence, the employee
shall be responsible for restitution for all or part of the cost of the damage.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
76 | P a g e

C-17

WORKPLACE CASUAL DRESS POLICY
I. Policy Statement
A. It is  the policy of the City of    Cleveland to provide opportunities for employees to
wear casual clothing in the workplace under appropriate circumstances.
B. In    the City's Departments, the observation of casual dress days as permitted in
this policy is  at the discretion of the appropriate Director and, the Mayor or the
Chief of Staff as designated by the Mayor.
II. Guidelines
A. Casual dress days are not available for employees who are required to wear
uniforms while at work.
B. Even on casual dress days, clothing worn in  the workplace must be appropriate
to the workplace and must contribute to a positive image of the City's
government and its employees.
1. Directors are authorized to determine dress which may not meet
this standard and to require employees to change into more
professional/appropriate clothing.
2. Shorts, sweat clothes, tank tops, halters, sandals and sandal-like
foot coverings are not acceptable in  the workplace unless authorized by a
Director for employees whose jobs are primarily outside during the
summer or for other specific work-related reasons.
C. Management employees who are regularly in  contact with the public should
always wear business attire.

D. Employees identified by a   director who may have contact with the public in   the
course of their work should have business attire readily available on casual
dress days.
This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Signature
Director of Personnel & HR
_
Title
March 17, 2008

Date

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-18
77 | P a g e

WORKPLACE SMOKING POLICY

I. Introduction

A. Whereas, the U.S., Environmental Protection Agency (E.P.A.), in January 1993,
classified environmental tobacco smoke as a Group A (known human)
carcinogen, and concluded that tobacco is the primary cause of 434,000 deaths
annually in  the United States. The U.S. E.P.A. estimates that approximately 3,000
of these deaths are among non-smokers exposed to second hand smoke;

B. Whereas, the American Heart Association estimates that 35,000 people die of
heart disease each year from second hand tobacco smoke;

C. Whereas, studies have found that tobacco smoke is  a major indoor air   pollutant
and that breathing second hand smoke is a cause of disease, including lung
cancer, respiratory failure, bronchoconstriction and bronchospasm in non-
smokers;

D. Whereas the Surgeon General of the United States, in   his    2006 report, The Health
Consequences of Involuntary Exposure to Smoke, concluded that:

1. There is  no risk-free level of    exposure to secondhand smoke.
2. Exposure to secondhand smoke has substantial and immediate adverse
effects on the cardiovascular system.
3. Establishing smoke-free workplaces is  the only effective way to ensure that
secondhand smoke exposure does not occur in the workplace.
4. Smoke-free workplace policies are effective in  reducing secondhand smoke
exposure.  Separating smokers from nonsmokers in the same air space,
cleaning the air and ventilating buildings are not effective at eliminating
exposure of nonsmokers to secondhand smoke.

E. Therefore, the City of    Cleveland enacts the following workplace smoking policy,
effective December 7, 2006.

II. General Policy

A. The City of Cleveland is dedicated to providing a healthy, comfortable, and
productive environment for all   City employees; specifically the City is  committed to
providing a smoke free environment for all workers.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-18
78 | P a g e

B. Moreover, the City is  committed to educating its workforce, and the general public,
about the dangers of smoking and other tobacco use.

C. The guidelines outlined in  this section apply for employees utilizing electronic
cigarettes and similar devices as well as all forms of smokeless tobacco.

III. Specific Policies

A. Smoking and other forms of tobacco is prohibited in all enclosed or partially
enclosed areas of City owned and leased facilities, including but not limited to:
offices, hallways, entranceways, lobbies and waiting areas, reception areas, rest
rooms, cafeterias and snack bars, elevators, stairwells, meeting and conference
rooms, kitchen areas and parking garages in City Hall, the Convention Center,
Cleveland Hopkins and Burke Lakefront Airports, all City Fire Stations, Police
Stations, Health Clinics, Recreation Centers, the City owned portion of    the Justice
Center, the East and West Side Markets and the buildings of all City
departments. Smoking is prohibited in all City owned and leased vehicles. This
policy will NOT apply to the leased portions of the Cleveland Brown's Stadium,
Cleveland Hopkins Airport, Burke Lakefront Airport or to facilities or portions of
facilities leased to other operators by the City however; these facilities/structures
are subject to the new state law, Ohio Revised Code (ORC), Chapter 3794, which
is in effect as of 12/07/2006.

B. Per the City ordinance 235.02, smoking is prohibited within one-hundred fifty
feet (150') of the primary entrance and exit of any enclosed or partially enclosed
area of    any City facility and on any steps leading to such entrance or exit, to the
extent that such outdoor area is owned or leased by the City. Such outdoor
areas include entranceways, parking areas, steps or lawn. Smoking is not
prohibited on public sidewalks, streets or any portion of the  public right-of-way
that are within one-hundred fifty feet (150') of a primary entrance or exit. A
primary entrance is the main entrance to a building, which is usually the
entrance which member if the public use when entering a building. An area
outside the facility may be designated for smoking in compliance with this policy.
IV. Implementation
A. NO SMOKING signs are to be clearly posted on all entrances to all City facilities;
in   all   conference rooms, public areas, hallways, lobbies, rest rooms and in  all   City
vehicles. The placement of signs on the exterior of all City owned buildings shall
be reviewed by the Director of City Planning or his or her designee. The City
Department of Public Health will pay for the NO SMOKING signs for  their facilities
unless other resources are identified.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
79 | P a g e

B. No ashtrays, including fixed installations, shall be permitted inside any City
facility.

C. Smoking cessation classes will be offered to City employees through the City's
Health Department and through cooperation with other area agencies.

D. This smoking policy is to be reproduced and distributed to all City employees.
The distribution of    this policy is  part of    a broader educational campaign focused
at City employees.

E. As appropriate, the City will provide accurate and current information about the
risk of smoking and tobacco use to employees.

V. Enforcement

A. Any City employee found to have violated this policy may be subject to
disciplinary action.

B. Any individual from the general public found to have violated Chapter 3794 of
the OCR, effective 12/07/2006, will be subject to the penalties outlined in the
statute.

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Signature
Director of Personnel & HR
_
Title
December 12, 2013
Date

C-18

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-19
80 | P a g e

WORKPLACE VIOLENCE POLICY

The current
Workplace Violence Policy can be
located under the New Policy
Section of Human Resources (HR)
Policies and Procedures.

*Upon review of all HR Policies and
Procedures a newly user-friendly manual
will be generated and distributed.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
81 | P a g e

       DRUG & ALCOHOL POLICY

The current
Drug & Alcohol Policy can be
located under the New Policy
Section of Human Resources (HR)
Policies and Procedures.

*Upon review of all HR Policies and
Procedures a newly user-friendly manual
will be generated and distributed.

C-20

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-21
82 | P a g e

CITY OF CLEVELAND ETHICS POLICY

I. Policy Statement

It is policy of the City of Cleveland (the "City") to carry out its mission in accordance
with the strictest ethical guidelines and to ensure that the City's officials and employees
conduct themselves in   a manner that fosters public confidence in   the integrity of Cleveland's
government, its processes, and its accomplishments.

II. General Standards of Ethical Conduct

(a) The City's officials and employees must, at all   times, abide by protections to the
public embodied in Ohio's ethics laws, as found in Chapters 102. and 2921. of the Ohio
Revised Code ("R.C."), and as interpreted by the Ohio Ethics Commission and Ohio courts. (A
copy of these laws is provided by the City to every official and employee, and receipt
acknowledged, as required in R.C. 102.09(D).) Officials and employees must conduct
themselves, at all times, in a manner that avoids favoritism, bias, and the appearance of
impropriety.

(b) A general summary of the restraints upon the conduct of all officials and
employees includes, but is  not limited to,  those listed below. No official or employee shall:

1. Solicit or accept anything of value from anyone doing business with the City;
2. Solicit or accept employment from anyone doing business with the City, unless
the official or employee completely withdraws from the City's activity regarding
the party offering employment, and the official's or employee's appointing
authority approves the withdrawal;
3. Use his or her public position to obtain benefits for the official or employee, a
family member, or anyone with whom the official or employee has a   business or
employment relationship;
4. Be paid or accept any form of compensation for personal services rendered on a
matter before any board, commission, or other body of the City, unless the
official or employee qualifies for    the exception, and files the statement, described
in R.C. 102.04(D);
5. Hold or benefit from a   contract with, authorized by, or approved by, the City,
(the Ethics Law does except some limited stockholdings, and some contracts
objectively shown as the lowest cost services, where all criteria under R.C.
2921.42 are met);
6. Vote, authorize, recommend, or in any other way use his or her position to
secure approval of a City contract (including employment or personal services) in
which the official or employee, a family member, or anyone with whom the
official or employee has a business or employment relationship, has an interest;

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-21
83 | P a g e

7. Solicit or accept honoraria (see R.C. 102.01(H) and 102.03(H)) ;
8. During public service, and for    one year after leaving public service, represent any
person, in any fashion, before any public agency, with respect to a matter in
which the official or employee personally participated while serving with the City;
9. Use or disclose confidential information protected by law, unless appropriately
authorized; or
10. Use, or authorize the use of, his    or her title, the name "City of Cleveland," or the
City's logo in a manner that suggests impropriety, favoritism, or bias by the City
or the official or employee.

(c) For purposes of    this policy:

1. "Anything of value" includes anything of monetary value, including, but not
limited to,    money, gifts, food or beverages, social event tickets and expenses,
travel expenses, golf outings, consulting fees, compensation, or employment.
"Value" means worth greater than de minimis or nominal.
2. "Anyone doing business with the City" includes, but is  not limited to,    any person,
corporation, or other party that is doing or seeking to do business with,
regulated by, or has interests before the City.

III. Departmental Rules of Ethical Conduct

The appointing authorities of the various departments are responsible for overseeing
the application of the rules of ethical conduct in the performance of the work by the
employees in their respective departments. To this end, each Director may promulgate
departmental rules in   addition to the General Standards of Ethical Conduct that are specific to
the daily work performance of their departmental employees.

IV. Assistance

The Ohio Ethics Commission is  available to provide advice and assistance regarding the
application of the Ethics Law and related statutes. The Commission can be contacted at (614)
466-7090.  The Commission's web site address is: www.ethics.ohio.gov.  The City's Law
Department is available to answer questions involving this policy.

V. Penalties

Failure of any City official or employee to abide by this Ethics policy, or to comply with
the Ethics Law and related statutes, will result in discipline, which may include dismissal, as
well as any potential civil or criminal sanctions under the law.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-21
84 | P a g e

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Director of Human Resources

Title
June 19, 2009

Date

Signature

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-22
85 | P a g e

PERSONAL ELECTRONIC DEVICES POLICY

Purpose

The purpose of this policy is to promote a safe and productive work environment and increase
employee safety. This policy applies to both incoming and outgoing communication methods.
This  policy  outlines  the  use  of  personal  electronic  devices  at  work  and  the  safe  use  of  those
devices by employees while driving.

Scope

This policy applies to all   employees.

Procedures

Personal Electronic Devices

While  at  work  employees  are  expected  to  exercise  the  same  discretion  in  using  personal
electronic devices as is expected for the use of company phones. Excessive personal calls during
the work day, regardless of the phone used, can interfere with employee productivity and be
distracting to others. Employees are encouraged to make any other personal calls on non-work
time where possible and to ensure that friends and family members are aware of City's policy.

The  City  will  not  be  liable  for   the  loss  of  personal  electronic devices brought  into the
workplace.

Cell phones shall be turned off   or set to silent or vibrate mode during meetings, conferences
and in other locations where incoming calls may disrupt normal workflow.
Based upon the discretion of the Appointing Authority/designee an employee may carry and
use personal cell phones while at work on a   sporadic basis. If   employee use of a   personal cell
phone causes disruptions or loss in productivity, the employee may become subject to
disciplinary action.

Personal cell phones may be required to be used for company business on a sporadic basis.

Safety Issues for Electronic Device Use

All employees are expected to follow applicable state or federal laws or regulations regarding
the use of all electronic devices at all times.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
86 | P a g e

Employees whose job responsibilities include regular or occasional driving and are expected to
refrain from using their personal electronic devices while driving. Safety must come before all
other concerns. Regardless of the circumstances, including slow or stopped traffic, employees
are  required  to  pull  off  to  the  side  of  the  road  and  safely  stop  the  vehicle  before  placing  or
accepting  a  call  or  use  hands-free  operations,  refrain  from  discussion  of  complicated  or
emotional matters and keep their eyes on the road. Special care should be taken in situations
where there is traffic, inclement weather or the employee is driving in an unfamiliar area.

Effective March 1, 2013, Cleveland (and State of Ohio) laws prohibit anybody over the age of
18, driving a vehicle, from sending a text message while driving. Additionally, persons under
the  age  of  18  may  not  use  personal  electronic  devices  while  operating  a  vehicle  under  any
circumstance. Law enforcement officials will not be issuing warnings for violators prior to issuing
a citation.

Employees  who  are  charged  with  traffic  violations  resulting  from  the  use  of  their  electronic
devices while driving, in any City and/or County, will be solely responsible for all liabilities that
result from such actions.

Video or Audio Recording Devices

The use of devices with audio or video recording capable within the company may constitute
not only an invasion of employees' personal privacy, but may breach confidentiality of the City
of  Cleveland's  protected  information.  Therefore,  the  use  of  camera  or  other  video-capable
recording  devices  within  the  City  is  prohibited  without  the  express  prior  permission  of  the
Appointing Authority/designee and of the person(s) present at the time.

Employees in   Violation of    this policy may be subject to the disciplinary action.

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Director of Human Resources
Title

December 12, 2013
Date

_

C-22

Signature

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-23
87 | P a g e

WORKPLACE PROFESSIONAL DRESS

Introduction

The City of Cleveland considers it very important you are well groomed, neat, and dress
appropriately for your job function and, while we trust each employee's common sense and
good judgment, a workplace dress policy must be followed that is appropriate to the work
environment. Appropriate dress and hygiene are important in promoting a positive City
image.

Office Environment

There may be situations requiring professional attire. If you are conducting or attending
meetings, seminars, roundtables, etc. where you come in contact with other business
professionals or the public, you are expected to represent the City in a professional manner
and dress appropriately for conducting such business. Know your audience, and dress
accordingly. If you are unsure of the appropriate attire speak with your supervisor.

Non Office Environment

The City has negotiated clothing allowances into many of our collective bargaining
agreements.  A   standard of    dress is  required to promote a   safe and productive working
environment. Employees who receive uniform allowances or maintenance stipends are
expected to report to work in uniform.

Employees are to know their uniform requirements for operational duties. If employees are
responsible for purchasing personal protective equipment (PPE) with their allowance it is
imperative that employees are aware of this requirement.

General Guidelines for Everyone

The City wishes to provide a work environment that is free of safety hazards, offensive
behavior and harassment of    any kind. Therefore, the following clothing is NOT ACCEPTABLE:
jeans, shorts, bib overalls, halter tops, beachwear, work-out attire, tank tops, tee-shirts,
spandex or other form-fitting pants, or distracting, offensive or revealing clothes. In addition,
we ask that you not wear athletic shoes, thongs, slippers, bare feet; sexually provocative
clothing; political statements; clothing with profanity, nude or semi-nude pictures; sexually
suggestive slogans; the observable lack of undergarments and exposed undergarments.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-23
88 | P a g e

Compliance

Managers and Supervisors are responsible for ensuring their departmental personnel are in
compliance. Managers and Supervisors reserve the right to send any person home to change
clothes who fails to report to work in the appropriate attire for their working environment.
Employee's may be permitted to use benefit time or will be in  an unpaid status if   the employee
does not have accumulated benefit time.

This policy does NOT require employees to purchase business attire. Employees who prefer to
dress in customary business attire should feel free to do so.  Employees in Violation of this policy
may be subject to the disciplinary action.

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Director of Human Resources
_
Title

March 5, 2012

Date

Signature

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-24
89 | P a g e

PROGRESSIVE DISCIPLINE PROGRAM

Purpose

The City of Cleveland subscribes to progressive discipline. The policy and procedures within
this program are designed to provide a structured corrective action process to improve and
prevent a   recurrence of undesirable behavior and/or performance issues.  It is  consistent with
the City of Cleveland's values, Human Resources best practices and employment laws. This
policy is not intended to supersede the collective bargaining agreement or Civil Service Rules.

Employee Responsibility
It is  the duty and the responsibility of    every employee to be aware of    and abide by existing
rules and regulations.

It is also the responsibility of the employee to perform his/her duties to the best of his/her
ability and to the standards as set forth in   his/her job description or as otherwise established.
Employees are encouraged to take advantage of all learning opportunities available and
request additional instruction when needed.

Responsibilities of Supervisors, Managers and Directors
The immediate appointing authority/designee must approach corrective measures in an
objective manner. Not only single incidents, but also patterns of poor performance should be
of concern as these are indicative of overall performance. If misconduct is the issue,
supervisor, manager, appointing authority or director should take steps to make sure that the
employee has been made aware of    the City's policies and regulations regarding the infraction.

Procedure

When a   management representative determines that an employee has conducted himself or
herself in a manner that is deemed "inappropriate", the management representative shall
consult with Human Resources to determine the appropriate action to take.

Outlined below are the recommended steps of the City's progressive discipline policy and
procedure. The City reserves the right to combine or skip steps depending upon facts of each
situation and the nature of the offense. The level of disciplinary intervention may also vary.
Some of the factors that will be considered depend upon whether the offense is repeated
despite coaching, counseling and/or training, the employee's work record and the impact the
conduct and performance issues have on our organization

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
90 | P a g e

Pre-Disciplinary Hearing (PDH)

Prior to any discipline being rendered, the employee shall be entitled to a   pre-disciplinary
hearing. During such pre-disciplinary hearing, the employee shall have the right to (1)
representation, (2) be informed of the charges, (3) be informed of the

evidence which the City has against the employee and provided with copies of any relevant
documents and (4) be afforded a meaningful opportunity to respond with oral and/or written
statements, testimony, documents, etc. in response to each allegation of inappropriate
conduct.

A pre-disciplinary hearing creates an opportunity for the Appointing Authority/Designee to
schedule a meeting with an employee to bring attention to the existing performance, conduct
or behavior. The appointing authority/designee should discuss with the employee the nature of
the problem and any violation of the City policies and procedures. At any point prior to the
PDH, the employee may choose to waive his or her opportunity to have a PDH. Attendance at
the PDH is mandatory unless waived.   The appointing authority/designee is expected to
clearly outline expectations and steps the employee must take to improve performance or
resolve the problem.

Within ten (10) business days or a reasonable time frame, the hearing officer will prepare written
documentation  of  a  pre-disciplinary  hearing.  The  written  notice  of  the  results  of  the  pre-
disciplinary hearing shall include reasons for any discipline rendered.

Types of Disciplinary Action

Prior to implementing any disciplinary action an employee is  entitled to a   pre-disciplinary
hearing.

Written Reprimands

Written Reprimands are used for behavior or violations which the supervisor, manager,
appointing authority or director considers serious or warning has not helped to change
unacceptable behavior. An employee should recognize the grave nature of the written
reprimand.

While it is hoped that the performance, conduct or behavior issues that were previously
identified have been corrected, the City recognizes that this may not always be the case.

C-24

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
91 | P a g e

Suspensions

A  suspension  without  pay  is  formal  documentation  of  the  performance,  conduct  or  behavior
issues and consequences. When computing days of suspension, holidays shall count as working
days.  However, in those instances where a disciplinary suspension causes an employee to be
in   inactive pay status on the last work day prior to the holiday or first day after the holiday, such
employee shall not be entitled to holiday pay. In no event will the City purposefully schedule
any suspension so that an employee will be deprived of the holiday pay.

Suspensions without pay that are recommended as part of the normal progression of this
progressive discipline policy and procedure are subject to approval by the Department of
Human Resources.

Reduction

Reduction means a   change of the classification held by an employee to one having a lower
base pay range, a change to lower step within a salary range with an accompanying
diminution in compensations, or any decrease in compensation for an employee.

Demotion

A   reduction in  rank or position to a   classification which carries a   lower salary range than that
previously held.

Termination of Employment

The last and most serious step in the progressive discipline procedure is a termination of
employment. The Appointing Authority/designee is encouraged to utilize the progressive
nature of    this policy by first providing warnings, and/or suspension from the workplace before
proceeding to a recommendation to terminate employment. However, the City reserves the
right to combine and skip steps depending upon the circumstances of each situation and the
nature of the offense.  Furthermore, employees may be terminated without prior disciplinary
action.

The Appointing Authority's recommendation to terminate employment must be approved by
the Department of Human Resources and the Departmental Section Chief and/or the
Departmental Director.

C-24

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
92 | P a g e

Performance and Conduct Issues Not Subject to  Progressive Discipline

Behavior that is  illegal is  not subject to progressive discipline and may be reported to local law
enforcement. Theft, falsification of documentation in order to gain a City of Cleveland benefit,
and acts of violence are also not subject to progressive discipline and may be grounds for
immediate termination. Appeal Process

Employees may have the opportunity to present information that may challenge information
management has used to issue disciplinary action. Collective bargaining unit employees may
appeal disciplinary action through the grievance procedure. Non-Bargaining unit employee
may appeal appropriate disciplinary action through the Civil Service Commission.

Conduct/Performance Improvement Measures

The utilization of measures described below can oftentimes help an employee improve his or
her performance or conduct without having to initiate formal disciplinary procedures. Their
purpose is to establish an understanding of the issues, exchange information, and establish
job expectations.  If the employee's performance or conduct does not improve, however, the
supervisor shall initiate disciplinary proceedings.

NOTE:  The following measures are NOT considered disciplinary action for purposes of the
Progressive Discipline Program.  These measures, however, may be mandated in   conjunction
with disciplinary action under the Progressive Discipline Program. An employee's failure to
fulfill a mandate pursuant to this section constitutes insubordination and may subject the
employee to disciplinary action.

Verbal Counseling

Verbal Counseling involves a private meeting between supervisor and employee, whereby the
employee is informed in detail of his or her conduct that the supervisor has deemed
inappropriate and of any action that may be necessary to correct said conduct. The supervisor
shall create a document detailing the reasons for and outcomes of the counseling. The
supervisor and employee shall sign the document. The employee's signature is an
acknowledgment of the receipt of the form, not agreement with its contents.

Performance Improvement Plan (PIP)

A   performance improvement plan is  a   formal process used by supervisors to help employees
improve performance or modify behavior. The PIP identifies performance and/or behavioral
issues that must be corrected and creates a   written plan of action to guide the improvement
C-24

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
93 | P a g e

and/or corrective action. A PIP may be used in   conjunction with a   verbal counseling, a
disciplinary action or a poor performance review.

A   PIP is  a   structured communication tool designed to facilitate constructive discussion between
the employee and supervisor. An effective PIP will:

• Consider the employee's input;
• Specifically identify the performance to be improved or behavior to be corrected;
• Provide reasonable and clear expectations about the work to be performed or behavior
that must change;
• Identify the support and resources available to help the employee make the required
improvements;
• Establish a plan for reviewing the employee's progress and providing feedback to the
employee for the duration of the PIP; and
• Specify consequences if   performance standards as identified in   the PIP are not met.

Example  of  how  to  insert  a  Performance  Improvement  Plan  (PIP)  into  a  pre-
disciplinary  hearing:  During  a  pre-disciplinary  hearing,  the  Appointing  Authority/Designee
may review any additional incidents or information about the performance, conduct or  behavior
of the employee as well as any prior relevant corrective action plans. Management will outline
the consequences for the employee of his or her continued failure to meet performance and/or
conduct expectations. A formal performance improvement plan (PIP) may be provided requiring
the  employee's  immediate  and  sustained  corrective  action  will  be  issued  within  five  business
days of a pre-disciplinary hearing. A charging letter outlining that the employee may be subject
to  additional  discipline  up  to  and  including  termination  if  immediate  and  sustained  corrective
action is not taken may also be included in the charging letter.

Training

In    an effort to further the professional development of    its   employees, the City will offer a wide
variety of training opportunities for its employees.

Management Referral to Employee Assistance Program

Under certain circumstances, the City may deem it necessary to require an employee seek
assistance through the City's Employee Assistance Program (EAP).  An employee who receives
a management referral shall be treated in the same manner as an employee who voluntarily
seeks assistance through the EAP except that the employee's attendance, motivation level,
and willingness to follow recommendations will be reported back to City management by the
EAP administrator.

C-24

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies

Fitness for    Duty

A department head may request a medical or psychological evaluation through the Civil
Service Commission when (1) an employee's conduct creates a reasonable belief that a threat
to the health or safety of the employee or others, or to City property, exists; or (2) there is
objective evidence that the employee cannot perform the essential job functions. The purpose
of    the evaluation is  to find out if   the employee can perform his    or her job in   a safe manner. In
order to ensure safety while the employee is being evaluated, the employee may, if
appropriate, be placed on a leave of absence for the time needed to conduct the evaluation.

Documentation

The employee will be provided copies of    all   progressive discipline documentation, including all
performance improvement plans. Copies of these documents will be placed in the employee's
official personnel file.

Professional Licenses

Any City employee who is required as a condition of his or her employment to possess and
maintain in   good standing, a professional license (e.g. license to practice law, social worker
license, etc.), shall immediately report any change in his or her licensure status to their
departmental management .  An employee who fails to promptly report any change in  their
licensure status may be subject to disciplinary actions, up to and including termination.

Inappropriate Conduct/Grounds for Discipline

Inappropriate Conduct

In accordance with Civil Service Rule 9.10, the City considers the following conduct to be
inappropriate and grounds for disciplinary action:

94 | P a  g e
C-24
Neglect of duty

Absence from duty without leave
Incompetence
Inefficiency
Fraudulent conduct
Conduct unbecoming an employee in    the public service

C-24
95| P a g e

Intoxication in  the course of his/her employment

Misuse or abuse of drugs or narcotics in  the course of his/her employment
Disorderly, immoral, or unethical conduct while on duty
Insubordination

Offensive conduct or language toward fellow employees, superiors or the public in
the course of his/her employment

Conviction of a   felony or conviction of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude
Negligent or willful damage to public property
Wasteful or unauthorized use of City vehicles, equipment, materials or property

Negligent, improper or inefficient handling or accounting for public funds or
accounts

Violation of    any departmental rule or regulation

The use or attempted use of political influence or authority upon any person in   the
Civil Service or engaging in any political activity

Excessive absenteeism or excessive tardiness.

For other failure of good behavior which is  detrimental to the service, or for any
other act of misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office.

Examples of    Inappropriate Conduct

The following examples of    inappropriate conduct are provided to assist City management with
administration of the Progressive Discipline Program. The examples, however, are provided
solely for illustration and are NOT intended to be exhaustive or exclusive.  Prior to
implementing any disciplinary action an employee is entitled to a pre-disciplinary hearing.

MINOR INFRACTIONS:

The following is  a non-exclusive list    of    examples of    minor infractions:
CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-24
96| P a g e

Type of Conduct - Neglect of    Duty/Inefficiency/Incompetency

• Taking unauthorized or extended lunch breaks.
• Being away from the worksite without permission or leaving work prior to the end of
the shift without authorization.
• Loafing, loitering or failing to perform work in a prompt, efficient manner.
• Reading material during regular work hours that is  not job-related or authorized by
management.
• Conducting non-work related business while on City time.

Type of Conduct - Violation of City Policies or Procedures, Violation of any departmental rule
or regulation

• Abuse of    City telephones for personal, local calls.
• Using City equipment for other than its intended purpose (including but not limited to
email and Internet).
• Failing to sign time sheets, properly register time or to punch time clock.

Type of    Conduct - Insubordination

• Failing to follow supervisor's instructions or Departmental procedures.

MAJOR INFRACTIONS:

The following is  a non-exclusive list    of    major infractions:

Type of Conduct - Neglect of    Duty/Inefficiency/Incompetency

• Sleeping while on duty.
• Leaving a   post of continuous operation without authorization prior to the end of the
shift or prior to relief.
• Failing to follow call-in  procedures without an approved leave of absence.
• Failing to report for    overtime after being scheduled to work overtime or refusing to
work mandated overtime when assigned.
• Failure to complete a legitimate job assignment.

Type of Conduct - Violation of City Policies or Procedures

• Abuse of    City telephone for personal long distance calls.

Type of Conduct - Discourteous Treatment of the Public, Offensive conduct or language
toward fellow employees, superiors or the public in the course of his/her employment

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-24
97| P a g e

• Failure to provide prompt courteous service to the public
Type of Conduct - Failure of Good Behavior
• Verbal abuse or profanity directed at a   co-worker, supervisor, or the public.
• Unauthorized sharing of    confidential information about clients and/or employees.
• Using another employee's confidential computer identification code without
authorization or giving another's code to anyone to use.

Type of Conduct - Insubordination

• Refusing a legitimate job assignment or failing to perform a   directive from a supervisor
or management representative.

REMOVABLE INFRACTIONS:

The following is  a non-exclusive list    of    removable infractions:

Type of Conduct - Neglect of    Duty/Inefficiency/Incompetency

• Egregious, flagrant or willful neglect in   the performance of assigned duties.
• Disregard for    safety or security regulations that results or would likely result in  serious
physical harm or major property loss or damage.

Type of Conduct - Violation of City Policies or Procedures

• Intentionally destroying City property or records without prior authorization.

Type of Conduct - Dishonesty

• Falsification of employment records or other City records in  a   manual or automated
systems, including falsification of stated reasons for use of    leave (e.g. abuse of sick
leave or using sick leave for unauthorized purposes.)
• Unauthorized punching, signing or altering other employee's time cards or time sheets.
• Unauthorized altering of    one's own time card or sheet.
• Making false claims or misrepresentations in  an attempt to obtain any City benefit (e.g.
health benefits, promotion, paid leave of absence, etc.)

Type of Conduct - Felony Conviction

• Conviction of    a felony.

Type of Conduct - Failure of Good Behavior

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-24
98| P a g e

• Soliciting or accepting a   gratuity or a bribe from anyone conducting business with the
City or seeking to do business with the City.
• Using obscene, abusive or threatening language or gestures, or performing an act with
intent to cause injury to another.
• Striking or physically assaulting another person.
• Fighting, except for    self-defense.
• Theft of    property from co-workers, the City or others.
• Unauthorized possession of a firearm, explosives, or other dangerous weapons on City
property or while engaged in City business.
• Performing an act which constitutes a   felony under the laws of    the United States, the
State of Ohio or the jurisdiction in which the act was committed.
• Making an unwelcome, uninvited sexual advance or request for a sexual favor,
especially of a   subordinate, a   vendor or customer, and/or touching someone else if   it  is
unwelcome and uninvited.
• Engaging in  a   pattern of behavior which creates a   hostile, intimidating, or offensive
work environment based on a protected characteristic.

Evaluation of    Inappropriate Conduct

All    inappropriate conduct shall be evaluated on a case by case basis, considering the following
factors:

• Level of    disruption to City business.
• Level of harm to City interests.
• Level of    damage to the public's trust and confidence in  City of Cleveland government.
• The employee's position and the degree of responsibility inherent in  the position (i.e.,
supervisory vs.   non-supervisory positions). Employees who occupy a supervisory
or management position are held to a higher standard of conduct
commensurate with the level of leadership required of them.
• Whether the employee's conduct is  part of    a   continuing problem.
• Whether the employee's conduct put a   co-worker, vendor or customer's safety and/or
security at risk.
• Whether the employee's honesty and veracity is  brought into question.
• Whether there are extenuating mitigating circumstances.
• Whether the inappropriate factor involves a   violation of    the City's Ethics Policy.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
C-24
99| P a g e

NOTE:  All finalized disciplinary actions are permanently placed in an employee's
personnel file.  The disciplinary action, however, will only remain active for two (2)
years for purposes of progressive discipline.  The two (2) year window shall be
measured backward from the date of the subsequent offense to the date the prior
discipline was imposed.  Employees in the Unclassified Service, at will and
probationary employees are exempt from this policy.
Example of Progressive Disciplinary Action Steps:
First (1
st
) Offense: Written Reprimand
Second (2
nd
) Offense: One (1) Day Suspension Without Pay
Third (3
rd
) Offense: Five (5) Day Suspension Without Pay
Fourth (4
th
) Offense: Ten (10) Day Suspension Without Pay
Fifth (5
th
) Offense: Termination

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Signature
Director of Human Resources

Title

 March 5, 2012

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
100| P a g e

GAMBLING WHILE ON-DUTY

I. Policy Statement

A. The City of Cleveland is committed to promoting and fostering a productive
and healthy work environment for all   employees.  The purpose of this policy
is to address the City of Cleveland's zero tolerance towards employees
gambling while at work or during the hours of which employees are to be
performing their job related duties.

B. We would like to use this policy to ensure employees are aware of problem
gambling and the resources available to any City of Cleveland employee who
feels that gambling issues are affecting the workplace.

C. The City of Cleveland prohibits employees from gambling while on City time
or while in uniform or other City employment items, such as hats, jackets,
badges, City vehicles, or I.D. tags as examples and not exhaustive.

II. Enforcement

A. Any employee found in  violation of    this policy is  subject to appropriate
disciplinary action up to and including discharge.

III. Employee Assistance Program

A. If you feel that you or a   family member has an issue with gambling, please
feel free to use the City's Employee Assistance Program (E.A.P.).

1. The City's E.A.P. provides confidential counseling and referral services to
City employees with their personal issues.

B. Also, the Ohio Problem Gambling Helpline can be used to help any employee
or their family member.

1. The Ohio Problem Gambling Helpline may be reached at 1-800-589-9966.

C-25

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
101| P a g e

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Signature

Director _of H_uman Re_sources
Title

February
_
1, 2013

Date

C-25

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
102| P a g e
C-26

SOCIAL MEDIA USE POLICY
I. Purpose

The City of Cleveland encourages personal expression and recognizes its employees may use
social media when communicating with family, friends, neighbors, and co-workers. As an
employee of the City of Cleveland, social media use necessitates certain responsibilities, even
when used during private time and/or on personal devices. Social media posts are viewed by
residents, City partners, and other outside entities, and your participation can be interpreted
as a reflection of the City.

The City defines social media as any digital platform which facilitates user conversation and is
part of an online community. Popular platforms include, but are not limited to Facebook,
Instagram, YouTube, Twitter, Snapchat, Pinterest, LinkedIn, and blogs. These sites allow
users to connect and share information/media with others around the world.

To assist you in making responsible decisions about employee social media use, the City of
Cleveland has adopted the following policy which applies to all   City of Cleveland employees.

II. Personal Social Networking Policy:

A. Privacy: The City's email and Internet communications are not private. The City has
the right to monitor an employee's personal and work-related use of the City's
technological systems and equipment including, but not limited to city-issued cell
phones and computers.

B. Topics Related to  City Business
a. Confidential or Proprietary Information: Employees shall not disclose any
confidential or proprietary information concerning the City, City operations, City
employees, or resident information on any social media site or through social
networking.
b. Association with the City: When conducting personal social networking,
employees must clearly convey that they are speaking for  themselves and not in
an official City capacity. It is recommended that employees put in their "about,"
"bio" or "profile" sections language that states their posts reflect their opinions
and do not represent the City of Cleveland. Employees engaging in personal
social networking may not represent that their activities or postings represent a
City "position" on any topic.
c. Engaging with Residents: Residents may approach employees on the
employees' personal social networking accounts to voice comments or concerns
about City functions or operations. Employees should kindly direct such
comments to the applicable channels available on the City's website, 3-1-1, the
Mayor's Action Center at 216-664-2900 or the Media Relations office.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
103| P a g e

d. City Logos: City logos, etc., may not be used in  any personal social networking
conducted by a City employee with the exception of listing employment on
professional networking sites, such as LinkedIn.
e. Termination of Employment: When an employee leaves or is  dismissed from
his    or her position, the employee agrees to refrain from posting any confidential
or proprietary information related to his or her former position as a City
employee.

C. Purely Personal Access During Work Hours
a. During working hours, employees shall limit the amount of their social
networking activities and access to and use of social media sites for personal or
non-work related purposes. This includes access from a personal cellular device,
such as a   smart phone or tablet, as well as any City-issued equipment. Personal
social media usage during working hours shall not interfere with the employee's
performance of job duties.
b. During working hours, employees shall not use social media for    personal financial
gain.
c. The Ohio Ethics Laws and the City of Cleveland Human Resource Policies and
Procedures apply to employees' social networking activity.
d. Employees will not be disciplined for activities protected under the law.

D. Purely Personal Access During Non-Work Hours
a. Because social networking is  not private, employees should use common sense
when posting comments, photos, opinions, or any other information.
b. Employees should ask themselves the following questions before engaging in
social networking: "What would this posting look like as a headline in the
newspaper and how could the post be perceived by the public?"
c. The Ohio Ethics Laws and the City of Cleveland Human Resource Policies and
Procedures apply to employees' social networking activity.
d. Employees will not be disciplined for activities protected under the law.

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Director of    Human Resources

Title
February 14, 2019

Date

C-26

Signature

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
   C-27
104| P a g e

GENERAL SAFETY POLICY

I. Purpose

The City of Cleveland developed this policy in  support of workplace safety and the reduction of
workplace/work-related accidents and injuries. The General Safety Policy is intended to
establish the foundation upon which detailed departmental and divisional safety policies and
procedures are developed and implemented.  These policies and procedures have been
established to ensure employees understand the City's safety practices and protocol to best
ensure their health and well-being while in the performance of their work related activities.

This policy applies to all employees in all City of Cleveland departments and divisions. If this
policy conflicts with other provisions of any department/divisional policy it  is  understood that
the city-wide policy supersedes.

II. Responsibilities of Supervisors, Managers and Directors

It is the responsibility of the appointing authority and/or his designee to ensure overall
compliance with this policy for    his/her respective Department. This includes but is  not limited
to the following activities:
• Support and promote the continual improvement of workplace safety;
• Enforce and comply with safety rules and regulations;
• Creating departmental safety policies and procedures;
• Inform staff of new regulations and compliance issues;
• Compliance with Bi-Annual Public Employers Risk Reduction Program (P.E.R.R.P.)
reporting;
• Assigning a safety officer to run department safety operations and participate on safety
committees and;
• Notify the Office of Risk Management upon the occurrence of a   work injury or hazard
identification.

III. Employee Responsibility

It is  the duty of all   City employees to promote the safety and security of fellow employees and
the general public who come in contact with City services and facilities.

All    employees and contractors of the City are required to perform their duties in  a   safe manner
aimed at preventing injuries and property or equipment damage throughout all City
operations. Each employee must safely operate equipment, tools and materials and
demonstrate an understanding of work rules and procedures for his or her areas of
responsibility. Each employee is responsible for identifying and reporting hazards. Each
employee shall fully cooperate to eliminate and control hazards in all areas of City facilities
without fear of reprisal.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
   C-27
105| P a g e

IV. Accident/Injury Review Committee

The City has established an Accident/Injury Review Committee to ensure the review of any
incident which has occurred in   the workplace or while utilizing City equipment/property. This
Committee may include representatives from the departments of Law, Human Resources,
Finance, Port Control, Utilities, Public Works, Public Safety, and the Office of Equal
Opportunity.

The review of    incidents includes but is not limited to the following activities:
• Institutionalization of an active safety recognition culture;
• Ensure that safety training is  conducted by all   departments/divisions;
• Adherence to safety policies and procedures;
• Review all   accidents which lead to injuries sustained by city employees, regardless of
their filing a workers' comp claim;
• Recommendations to departments when safety infractions occur;
• Have the injured employee and their supervisor give first-hand account of how the
event transpired and how we can avoid a repeat incident;
• Track and collate data from these reviews and share them with the appropriate
departments and divisions.

Committee members will be appointed to 24-month terms at the discretion of the City's Risk
Manager.

V. Training Requirements

Mandatory safety training will be conducted by each department/division with the assistance of
the Office of Risk Management no less than every two years.

Each department/division shall verify that each employee receives and understands the
required training through training rosters signed by attendees and instructors and a written
certification/assessment that identifies the subject of the certification as well as proof of
competency and contains the name of each employee trained, the date(s) of training, the
objectives covered in training and the instructor's name and contact information.

All newly hired City employees including interns and temporary employees in every
department/division throughout the City shall also be required to attend safety training
through their orientation session.  All employees will sign-off upon the completion of their
training. Failure comply with signature requirements may subject the employee to disciplinary
action.

Successful completion of    the departmental/divisional safety skills assessment will be the
baseline for departmental/divisional safety competency.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
106 | P a g e

Re-training

All    employees on excused absence or FMLA for    a period of six  -consecutive months or more are
required to attend a safety refresher training for their respective department or division, which
will be conducted by the Safety Designee. The employee should be re-trained immediately
upon their return to work or at the next available class. Additionally, it is the responsibility of
the department or division to account for all employees who will be returning from an excuse
absence or FMLA.

All    employees involved in  a   MVA (motor vehicle accident) deemed by the MVA committee to be
preventable or preventable with mitigating circumstances shall attend a refresher safety
training (including driver safety) or job specific training conducted by their department or
division.

All    employees sustaining a work-related injury shall attend refresher safety training.

All    employees attending refresher safety training shall also satisfactorily complete a   skills
assessment before they can return to their position.

VI. Procedure

Upon the occurrence of an incident that leads directly to an injury/illness or physical damage
to property (regardless of    ownership) the party/parties involved shall immediately contact their
direct supervisor in accordance with the City's Progressive Discipline Policy. The current
process of submitting completed forms OWC-3 (Employees accident form) and OWC-4
(Supervisors Report of an Employee Injury) is still in effect. In the supervisor's absence,
contact the proper hierarchical appointing authority. This will initiate the reporting/recording
procedures and possible post-accident drug/alcohol testing as determined by the City Labor
Relations Manager/designees (See the Drug and Alcohol Testing Policy).

VII. Accountability

Due to the serious nature and overall importance for the well-being of our employees, the City
of Cleveland places Accountability as one of its highest priorities. Employees are strongly
encouraged to ensure proper safety practices are followed when conducting their respective
job responsibilities and throughout the workplace. Failure to uphold such a level of
accountability, resulting in a violation of any safety policy, will be grounds to enforce
disciplinary action. For further information on disciplinary sanctions, please refer to the City's
Disciplinary Policy.

C-27

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
106 | P a g e

Safety Violation Report

In the event of a safety violation, the observing party will be required to complete a Safety
Violation Report(Attachment A) which provides a   detailed account of    the infractions, violations
or unsafe work zone. The Safety Violation Report will be assessed by the Accident/Injury
Review Committee and/or the departmental/divisional Safety Committee (if applicable) to
provide recommendations of possible safety enhancements and/or disciplinary action.

VIII. Job Hazard Analysis (JHA)

The department/division shall ensure that a   periodic assessment of the workplace is  completed
by a supervisor or safety representative in order to determine if hazards are present, or are
likely to be present.

Using the Job Hazard Analysis form included as (Attachment B) to this policy, each task will be
evaluated to determine what hazards are involved in the work and the work environment and
what Personal Protection Equipment (PPE) is required to protect employees. If the position
involves varying job tasks, all job tasks are to be evaluated separately. One Job Hazard
Analysis form is to be used for each job task.

All    hazards and potential hazards caused by the work, job task or the work environment will
be determined and listed on the form.

The most appropriate PPE to protect an employee performing the job or task will be
determined and listed on the form. The supervisor or other employee (Safety Representative
or senior employee) completing the JHA will sign the completed Job Hazard Analysis form and
forward it to the division or department director, as appropriate.

A   copy of the completed Job Hazard Analysis form will be kept on file in   the department or
division and a copy forwarded to the Risk Manager electronically.

When procedures for existing job tasks change or new job tasks are added, a hazard
assessment must be conducted.  Also, when the environmental conditions change, a new
assessment form must be completed. Assessments may take place every two (2) years as
deem necessary by the department/division.

IX. Other

All    PPE will meet federal and state guidelines and must be approved by the Division's Safety
Representative and or the City's Risk Manager prior to use. The city requires that all
uniform/boot allowances include the maintenance of PPE's and clothing in an appropriate
manner to ensure that the safety qualities are retained.
C-27

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
107| P a g e

______________________________

X. Record Keeping

The following exhibits are forms required to be kept on file by all   city departments and
division's where applicable and appropriate.
Safety Violation Report (
Attachment A); Job Hazard Analysis form (Attachment B)

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Signature
_
Direct
_
or of Human Resources
Title
August 22, 2014

Date

C-27

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
108| P a g e

Attachment 1

Introduction: The following Safety Violation Report will be utilized to provide a detailed summary of any safety
violation(s) which has occurred.
Procedures: Following completion of the Safety Violation Report, all   documents shall be forwarded to the Office
of Risk Management for    review. As a result, the Safety Violation Report will be assessed by the Safety Committee
or Accident/Injury Review Committee for disciplinary recommendations.
Office of Risk Management Date of Occurrence:

Safety Violation Report

Name of Employee(s):
Employee ID Number(s):
Supervisor Name:
Commissioner Name:

Director Name:

Department/Division:   Pictures Y/N

Time:  A.M. /P.M.  Location:

Environmental Conditions:

Rules Violation ('s)

 No PPE/Other:
 Improper Use of equipment
 Safety Belts not Utilized
 No   ANSI Z28.1 Safety Glasses
 Improper Lifting Techniques
 Other
 Lack of Harness/Fall Arrest Equip.
 Improper Work Zone Delineation
 Improper Use of Vehicle or Equip.
 No   Trench Box/Shoring
 Damaging City Property
Safety Analysis:

Employee Explanation:

(Dates of Previous Warnings for Employee and Supervisor)

Safety Observant Name:
C-27-1

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
109| P a g e
C-28

TIMEKEEPING POLICY
Timekeeping Guidelines
The  City  of  Cleveland  maintains  a  comprehensive  City-wide  standard  for  accurately  tracking
employee attendance and working time. The City utilizes two methods for capturing time worked
by employees; (1) timesheets - including paper and electronic forms; and (2) automated time
recording system (i.e. Kronos). The following policy is intended to provide uniform guidelines
for employees to follow as they use the timekeeping system. The City of Cleveland expects every
employee (exempt and non-exempt) to give the citizens of Cleveland a full and productive day
of work during their scheduled working time. Employees of the City  of Cleveland will be subject
to  disciplinary  action  for  time  and  attendance  abuse.  Abuse  includes,  but  is  not  limited  to,
falsification of time records.
Employees  can  only  be  paid  for  time  worked  or  for  accrued  benefit  time  i.e.  sick,  vacation,
personal or comp time only. Employees cannot be paid for    anticipated donation times for FMLA
or other potential donations.
The provisions of this Policy apply to all City employees who are not "exempt" from receiving
overtime pursuant to the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act.
Clock-In Periods and Compensation for All Time Worked: This policy gives employees
who use the Kronos timekeeping system or other City approved timekeeping software to record
their arrival and departure from work a 6-minute clock-in period to swipe in before the start of
their scheduled shift and to swipe out after the end of their scheduled shift. Employees must not
perform any work activities during these clock-in periods or during any other times outside of
their  scheduled  shifts,  including  during  their  meal  periods  or  before  the  pre-shift  or  after  the
post-shift clock-in periods (all of these are examples of working "off-the-clock"), without prior
management approval.  Failure to get prior approval may subject you to disciplinary action.
Nevertheless, employees will be compensated for all time actually worked. Employees
are required to follow the procedures described in paragraphs A.8 and A.9 of this policy to report
all  additional  time  actually  worked  outside  of  their  scheduled  shifts,  including  during  clock-in
periods, off-the-clock periods or during their meal period. Employees will be compensated for
this  time,  if  actually  worked,  upon  completion  and  submission  of  Exhibit  B  (Overtime  Pre-
Approval Form) or Exhibit C (Reported Additional Time Worked Form). Employees may obtain
all forms for reporting additional time worked from a supervisor, payroll, or Human
Resources.
Complaint  Procedure: All  employees  are  prohibited  from  working  off-the-clock.  Employees
are  required  to  immediately  report  to  a  Human  Resources  representative  if  anyone  asks  or
requires them or others to work off-the-clock or in any way discourages them from reporting
any additional time worked pursuant to the procedures described in this policy. Employees must
report to Human Resources if   they become aware of    any circumstances in  which they or

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
110| P a g e
C-28

other employees are working or permitting other employees to work without properly recording
working time or without using the procedures and forms described in this policy to be paid for
all of their working time. The Human Resources representative shall document and investigate
the complaint.
Supervisors who ask or require employees to work off-the-clock or in any way discourage  them
from reporting any additional time worked pursuant to the procedures described in this policy
will be subject to disciplinary action.
A. Timekeeping Procedures
1. The  Kronos  System  (or  other  City  approved  timekeeping  software)  is  the  means
through which employee attendance records are maintained. Employees are expected
to  use  this  system  so  that  timekeeping  is  uniform  and  reliable.  There  is  a  general
scheduled work time for standard City of Cleveland employees of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.  with  a  1  hour  unpaid  meal  period.  Employees  are  permitted  to  perform
work  activities  only  during  their  scheduled  shift  times  (on-the-  clock)
unless  additional  working  time  is  pre-approved  in  accordance  with  this
policy.
2. Kronos (or other City approved timekeeping software) swipe cards are the property
of  the  City  of  Cleveland  and  are  issued  to  an  employee  to  facilitate  accurate
timekeeping.  Swipe  cards  are  the  responsibility  of  the  employee.  Employees  must
notify the supervisor immediately if a swipe card is lost or damaged. A lost or damaged
card  must  be  replaced  unless  otherwise  directed  by  the  Department/Division.  The
replacement card must be obtained from the Department/Division designee within
two  (2)  days  of  the  first  missed  swipe.  A
$10.00 fee will be charged for a lost, damaged, or replacement of the City of Cleveland
swipe card. The first damaged card will be replaced at the City of Cleveland's expense.
3. All    employees who are issued a   swipe card must use that card to swipe in  and out of
the  assigned  time  clock.  "Swipe"  refers  to  any  means  an  employee  reports  their
attendance  through  Kronos  (or  other  City  approved  timekeeping  software)  and,
includes via swipe cards, manual time clock punches, or time registered by biometric
systems.
4. The swipe card is  to be used consistent with the following guidelines:
a. Daily swipes are required as follows:
i. Start of work day;
ii. In any departments where time for a meal period is not automatically
deducted, the beginning and end of the meal period; and
iii. End of    work day

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
111| P a g e

b. Under no circumstances may an employee swipe another employee in or
out. Any and all employees involved in    this type of violation will be subject
to discipline up to and including termination.
c. All  overtime  must  be  approved  prior  to  or  promptly  after  the
overtime   worked   by   the   appointing   authority   or   designee.
Employees will be paid for all time actually worked, whether or not
pre-approval  is  obtained.  However,  an  employee  who  fails  to
obtain   approval   for   overtime   worked   may   be   subject   to
disciplinary action.
5. Employees have a six (6) minute clock-in period to "swipe in" on the time-keeping
system prior to the start of their scheduled shift. Employees who voluntarily choose
to swipe in up to six minutes before their regular starting time must not engage
in  any  work  activities  before  the  start  of  their  scheduled  shift  without
management pre-approval. For purposes of this directive, the following activities
are  examples  of  "work  activities"  that  must  not  take  place  during  or  prior  to  the
clock-in period before the start of an employee's scheduled shift:
a. Engaging  in   the  principal  activities  which the  employee  is   employed to
perform
b. Attending shift briefings, meetings or training programs
c. Picking up keys, tools, supplies, materials or other equipment to be used
by the employee in the performance of his or her principal work activities
d. Reading or sending work related e-mails
e. Reading work related materials or reports
f. Exchanging or returning equipment
g. Picking up or delivering mail
h. Providing  or  receiving  instructions  or  briefing  about  work  assignments  or
matters  that  are  relevant  to  the  performance  of  the  employee's  principal
work activities
i. Completing reports or other job-related paperwork
j. Making or receiving work related phone calls
k. Organizing or planning for daily work activities
l. Starting up work related computer programs
m. Any other work related activity undertaken primarily for the benefit of the
City of Cleveland.
At the end of their shift, employees must stop working and must promptly "swipe out"
on  the  time-keeping  system  within  six  (6)  minutes  after  the  end  of  their  scheduled  shift.
Employees  must  not  perform  any  work  activities  after  their  scheduled  shift  ends
without management pre-approval.

C-28

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
112| P a g e
C-28

Employees who follow this directive will be paid for all time worked during their scheduled
shift.  Employees  must  report  any  additional  time  worked  using  the  procedures  described  in
paragraphs A.8 and A.9 of this policy and must complete the required forms to be paid for that
time.
6. Missed Swipes: If an employee forgets to swipe, or misses a swipe due to a lost,
misplaced,  or  forgotten  swipe  card,  the  employee  must  promptly  fill  out  a  "Missed
Swipe" form attached as Exhibit A to this policy reporting the date, time, and reason
for the missed swipe and submit it to his or her supervisor. The supervisor shall sign
the "Missed Swipe" form and submit it to their divisional payroll lead.
7. If  a  supervisor  becomes  aware  that  an  employee  missed  a  swipe,  he  or  she  must
direct the employee to complete the Missed Swipe form (Exhibit A or the Reported
Additional  Time  Worked  form  in  Exhibit  C if  the  missed  swipe  was  due  to  the
employee performing work). Supervisors may not enter or submit missed swipes to
the  divisional  payroll  leads  for  employees  without  having  employees  complete  and
sign the required form.
8. Work Outside of Scheduled Shifts:
A. Foreseeable Overtime
Employees  are  expected  to  submit  "Overtime  Pre-Approval"  forms  attached  in
Exhibit B for any foreseeable work outside of their scheduled shifts. These forms
should be submitted to their Appointing Authority or designee for approval  before
performing  such  work.  The  Appointing  Authority  or  designee  must  sign   the
"Overtime  Pre-Approval"  form,  designate  the  scheduled  work  times  for  the
anticipated approved overtime, and return the form to the employee. Employees
must  then  write  in  the  actual  time  they  started  and  stopped  performing  the
approved work and submit the completed form to divisional/departmental payroll
lead. Employees must not perform any work activities outside of their scheduled
shifts without prior supervisor approval.
B. Additional Time Worked
Employees,  however,  have  the  right  to  be  paid  for  all  work  performed.  If  an
employee  performs  any  work  activities  before  the  beginning  of  the  employee's
scheduled shift or after the end of the employee's shift due to unforeseeable events
or other circumstances that did not permit the employee to get advance approval,
the employee must promptly fill out a "Reported Additional Time" form attached
as Exhibit  C to  this  policy  stating  the  date,  time,  reason  for  overtime,  and  the
work completed and submit it to his or her supervisor for approval. Unforeseeable
events  or  circumstances  are  defined  as  work  tasks  that  could  not  have  been
reasonably  anticipated  or  otherwise  could  not  realistically  have  been  completed
during  a  scheduled  shift.  The  Appointing  Authority  or  designee  must  sign  the
"Reported  Additional  Time" form  (Exhibit  C)  and promptly  submit  it   to

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
113| P a g e
C-28

the  divisional/departmental  payroll  lead.  The  City  will  accept  "Reported
Additional  Time"  forms  submitted  by  employees  at  any  time  and  will
compensate employees for all reported time actually worked outside of
their scheduled shift.
If  an  Appointing  Authority  or  designee  refuses  to  sign  or  approve  a  "Reported
Additional Time" form for any reason, the employee may submit the form directly
to  a  division/departmental  payroll  or  Human  Resources  representative  to  be
compensated  for  the  reported  time.  A  request  to  be  compensated  for  time  not
actually worked will not be approved and will subject the employee to  disciplinary
action.
9. Meal  Periods: Employees  must  not  perform  any  work  activities  during  their  meal
period. However, if an employee is unable to take a meal period because he or she
has to perform work (as directed by their supervisor or due to unforeseeable events
or  other  unexpected  circumstances),  or  experiences  more  than  a  momentary
interruption and has to perform work activities during the meal period, he or she must
report the time worked by submitting a "Reported Additional Time" form attached in
Exhibit C to his or her Appointing Authority or designee. An interruption is more than
momentary  if  it  is  a  single  interruption  that  lasts  more  than  three  minutes;  an
interruption that requires the employee to physically leave the meal location to return
to the work area, or a series of short interruptions totaling more than three minutes
combined.
If  an  Appointing  Authority  or  designee  refuses  to  sign  or  approve  a  "Reported
Additional Time" form for any reason, the employee may submit the form directly to
a   division/departmental   payroll   or   Human   Resources   representative   to   be
compensated for the meal period.
For employees in departments that require employees to swipe out and in
for meal breaks: Meal break swipes will be recorded to the minute. For example, if
you  have  a  30  minute  meal  period  and  clock  out  at  12:07pm,  you  must  return  at
12:37pm. In departments where employees are required to take their meal period at
a particular time, employees must swipe out for their meal period at the designated
time. Any employee whose swipes, upon leaving for or returning from the meal period,
reflect a late departure for or an early return from the designated meal period must
fill out "Report of Additional Time Worked" (Exhibit C) if that employee is performing
compensable work during the designated meal period.  If operational necessities so
require,  Supervisors  have  the  discretion  to  allow  an  employee  to  take  a  full,
uninterrupted meal break at a time different than the scheduled meal break.
10. If  the  employee  submits  a  "Missed  Swipe"  form,  "Overtime  Pre-Approval"  form,  or
"Reported Additional Time" form in  accordance with these procedures, the employee
will be compensated for all reported time worked to-the-minute based on the actual
time  of  the  missed  swipe(s)  or  the  reported  starting  and  ending  time  of any

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies
114| P a g e
C-28

_______________________________
additional work performed outside of the scheduled shift or during the meal period
provided that the employee actually performed compensable work during this  period.
11. However, the City reserves its right to discipline employees for performing unapproved
work activities outside of their scheduled shifts or during their meal period. Employees
will  be  subject  to  progressive  discipline  if  they  work  off-the-clock  and  fail  to  report
additional time worked or engage in a pattern of working off-the- clock without prior
approval.
B. Sign In/Sign Out Policies: Departments and divisions that adhere to a sign in/sign out
procedure to record employee attendance are not subject to the "clock-in period" but are
required to observe the following guidelines.
1. Employees are required to sign in and out daily and the time sheet must be signed by
the employee at the end of each week.
2. The employee's signature on the time sheet verifies that the entries made on the time
sheet reflect the actual time that the employee started performing work activities at
the  beginning  of  the  work  day,  stopped  and  started  working  upon  departure  and
returned from a   meal period (if    required), and stopped working at the end of the work
day.
3. Employees are permitted to perform work activities only during their scheduled shift
times  (on-the-clock)  unless  additional  working  time  is  pre-approved  in  accordance
with  the  policy.  Nonetheless,  employees  will  be  compensated  for  all  time  actually
worked.
4. Misrepresentations in time entered on timesheets may be considered falsification and
the employee may be subject to disciplinary action.
5. Employees must report any additional time worked using the procedures described in
paragraphs  A.8  and  A.9  of  this  policy  and must complete  the  required  forms  to  be
paid for that time.

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Signature
Director of Human Resources

Title
Date
November 25, 2014

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies

 Exhibit A
CITY OF CLEVELAND
MISSED SWIPE FORM

If you miss a swipe, please complete this form and submit it as soon as possible to your supervisor. Failure
to do so may delay payment for the reported time.

SECTION A: TO BE COMPLETED BY EMPLOYEE

Full Name: Employee ID Number: Date:
Signature: Time In:
Department/Division: Time Out:
Reason for the missed swipe:

□ Forgotten swipe
□ Lost/misplaced/forgotten  card
□ Other (please specify)

By signing this form you are indicating that the information provided is true and accurate to the best of
your knowledge. Purposefully submitting falsified information is grounds for disciplinary action up to and
including termination.
SECTION B:   TO BE COMPLETED BY SUPERVISOR

Approved   Not Approved

Reason for Non-Approval

Supervisor's Name:

Date

Supervisor's Signature:

115 | P a  g e
C-28-A

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies

 Exhibit B
CITY OF CLEVELAND
OVERTIME PRE-APPROVAL FORM
If you can foresee, anticipate, or   expect the need to perform any work before or after your scheduled shift or
during your meal period, please complete this form and submit prior to your supervisor for pre-approval. After
your supervisor approves the overtime and fills in the portion below to schedule the expected overtime, please
fill in the actual starting and stopping times for the additional approved work you performed and submit the
completed form to payroll. Failure to follow these instructions may delay  payment for the reported time.
SECTION A: TO BE COMPLETED BY EMPLOYEE
Full Name: Employee ID Number: Date of Request:
Signature: Date(s) of Anticipated Work:
Department/Division: Start/End Times of Anticipated Work:
Reason for requested overtime and description of work to be performed:
After  you  have  performed  the  pre-approved work, please fill in your starting and stopping times for the
pre-approved work you actually performed:

By signing this form you are indicating that the information provided is true and accurate to the best of your
knowledge. Purposefully submitting falsified information is grounds for disciplinary action up to and including
termination.
SECTION B:   TO BE COMPLETED BY APPOINTING AUTHORITY OR DESIGNEE
Approved:  Not Approved:
Approved overtime schedule (if  different from that requested above):
Date(s) of Work:   Start time(s):    End time(s):

Reason for Non-Approval or Modification:

Appointing Authority or Designee's Name:

Date:
Appointing Authority or Designee's Signature:
C-28-B
 116 | P a  g e

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies

 Exhibit C
CITY OF CLEVELAND
REPORTED ADDITIONAL TIME WORKED FORM
If you performed any work before or after your scheduled shift or during your meal period that has not been
pre-  approved by  a  supervisor  in  advance,  please  complete  this  form  and  submit  to  your  supervisor  for
approval as soon as possible after completing the additional work. If you cannot or do not receive supervisor
approval   for   any   reason,   please   submit   this   form   directly   to   your   payroll   or   Human   Resources
representative. Failure to follow these instructions may delay payment for the reported time.
SECTION A: TO BE COMPLETED BY EMPLOYEE
Full Name: Employee ID Number:
Signature: Date(s):
Department/Division:
Description of work completed:
Please check the reason for additional time worked and the starting and stopping time of any additional work
you performed outside of your scheduled shift or during your meal period:
□ Work before scheduled shift: Start time:   End time:
Start time:   End time:
Start time:   End time:
□ Work after scheduled shift: Start time:   End time:
Start time:   End time:
Start time:   End time:
□ Work during meal period: Start time:   End time:
Start time:   End time:
Start time:   End time:
By signing this form you are indicating that the information provided is true and accurate to the best of your
knowledge. Purposefully submitting falsified information is grounds for disciplinary action up to and including
termination.
SECTION B:   TO BE COMPLETED BY APPOINTING AUTHORITY OR DESIGNEE
Approved:  Not Approved:

Reason for Non-Approval:

Appointing Authority or Designee's Name:

Date:

Appointing Authority or Designee's Signature:
C-28-C
 117 | P a  g e

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies

Employee Acknowledgement
Timekeeping  Guidelines

I  acknowledge  that  I  have  received  a  copy  of  and  read  the  Timekeeping  Guidelines.  I  understand  the
Timekeeping Guidelines and agree to comply with their requirements.

I understand that I cannot work off-the-clock. I understand that it is my responsibility to report all  hours
that I actually worked and to seek pre-approval of any anticipated overtime, report any missed swipes,
and report any additional hours worked using the procedures described in the Timekeeping Guidelines.

I understand that failure to accurately report all time worked or asking another employee to work "off
the clock" is a violation of City policy. I understand that if anyone tells me to report less than all of my
working time, I am required to report this violation of City policy to Human Resources immediately.

If I forget to properly report my working time, I will immediately inform my supervisor, payroll, or Human
Resources.

I understand that failure to comply with these Timekeeping Guidelines may result in disciplinary action.

Full Name (please print): Date:
Signature:
Department/Division:
Employee ID:

C-28-D

118 | P a  g e