--- PAGE 1 ---
CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Benefit Policies

Page | 1

PAID PARENTAL LEAVE POLICY
I. Introduction

The purpose of  this policy is to demonstrate a commitment to the health and
wellbeing of our workforce.  The Paid Parental Leave Policy entitles eligible
employees to a paid leave of absence during the twelve (12) month period
following the birth of a newborn, the placement of a newly adopted, or the
appointment of legal guardianship of a child by a court of law. Eligible employees
are also entitled to additional intermittent paid leave for certain appointments
related to the pregnancy, birth, and adoption of a child.
II. Effective Date
The effective date of this policy is September 15, 2023.
III. Eligible Employees
A.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  below, all regular full-time annual
rate City employees and all full-time hourly rate employees who
have completed thirty (30) days of continuous employment  with
the City are eligible for Paid Parental Leave.
B. For purposes of the thirty (30) days of continuous employment
with the City requirement, "employment" means on the active
payroll. Time spent on approved leave is to be counted for
purposes of determining if an employee satisfies the thirty (30) day
requirement.
C. Hourly rate craft employees paid on the basis of building trades
prevailing wages are not eligible.
D. The eligibility of City employees in a bargaining  unit is subject to
the terms of the City's collective bargaining agreements and the
requirements of Chapter 4117 of the Ohio Revised Code.

IV. Compensation
Eligible employees for Paid Parental Leave shall be paid at 100% of their base pay.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Benefit Policies

Page | 2

V. Length of Paid Parental Leave
A. Eligible employees may use up to twelve (12) weeks of Paid Parental
Leave.
1. Paid Parental Leave may be used for one of the following
qualifying events during the twelve week period following:
a. Birth of a child;
b.  Adoption of a child who is eighteen (18) years of age or
younger or is over eighteen (18) years of age and is
incapable of self-care due to a physical or mental
disability; or
c.  Appointment of legal guardianship  of a child by a court
of law who is eighteen (18) years of age or younger or is
over eighteen (18) years of age and is incapable of self-
care due to a physical or mental disability.

For all the qualified events stated in (a) through (c) above, the
employee must either be the biological parent, adoptive
parent, or legal guardian.
2. If the two parents are both City employees, each shall be
entitled to twelve (12) weeks of Paid Parental Leave.
3. Multiple births or adoptions within twelve (12) months of
each other shall be considered as one qualifying event for
purposes of determining eligibility for Paid Parental Leave.
4. In  the event that a newly born or newly placed child dies
during  the  period  of  time  that the employee is on Paid
Parental Leave, the employee shall be entitled to the full
extent of the Paid Parental Leave, and the Paid Parental Leave
shall not terminate due to the death of the child.  All other
provisions of Paid Parental Leave shall apply.
5. To provide flexibility for employees to use Paid Parental
Leave to meet their needs, Paid Parental Leave may be taken
in separate increments of time due to a single qualifying

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Benefit Policies

Page | 3

event.
6.  Eligible employees who experienced a qualifying event prior
to September 15, 2023, may take Paid Parental Leave after
the effective date of this policy until the expiration of the
twelve (12) month period following the qualifying event.
B. An employee who would otherwise be eligible for Paid Parental
Leave  and who experiences any of the following shall be entitled
to three (3) weeks of Paid Parental Leave:

1. A pregnancy loss due to miscarriage or stillbirth. As used in this
policy, "miscarriage" means a spontaneous interruption of a
pregnancy of a fetus of less than 20 weeks gestation and "stillbirth"
has the same meaning in RC 124.136 (A) (2).

2. A pregnancy loss related to any condition or complication that
impacts the viability of the fetus and results in medical
intervention or where termination of the pregnancy is necessary
to protect the employee's life or health.

C. In addition to the twelve (12) weeks of Paid Parental Leave, every eligible
employee shall be entitled to, as appropriate, up to twenty (20) hours of
intermittent Paid Parental Appointment Leave to attend prenatal medical
and related appointments up to the birth of a child(ren) and up to 20 hours
of intermittent Paid Parental Appointment Leave to attend required
meetings or interviews to obtain approval for an adoption of a child(ren),
all subject to applicable leave of absence policies and procedures.

VI. Coordination with other City Policies

A. If an employee is FMLA eligible, then Paid Parental Leave must be taken
concurrently with FMLA Leave and be counted against FMLA Leave.

B. Employee benefits will be maintained during Paid Parental Leave.
Employees shall remain eligible for all employer-paid and employer­
provided benefits and continue to accrue other benefits while on Paid
Parental Leave.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Benefit Policies

Page | 4

C. Employees on Paid Parental Leave are ineligible to receive overtime pay,
and no portion of Paid Parental Leave shall be included in calculating an
employee's overtime pay.

D. Employees on Paid Parental Leave are ineligible to receive holiday pay. A
holiday occurring during the leave period shall be counted as one day of
Paid Parental Leave and shall be paid as such.

E. Bereavement leave under Section 171.31 of the Cleveland Codified
Ordinances is not available to an employee who experiences a pregnancy
loss or death of the child either for which such Paid Parental Leave was
granted.

F. Upon separation of the individual's employment, unused Paid Parental
Leave is forfeited; under no circumstance will this benefit be paid out.

VII. Procedures for Taking Paid Parental Leave

A. Paid Leave under Paragraphs  A & B of Article V.

1. The employee must submit the Request for Medical
Leave/Paid Parental Leave Form (A-10-1) to his or her
appointing authority or designee, at least 30 days' prior to the
proposed date of the leave (or if the leave was not
foreseeable, as soon as possible).

2. The request will be submitted to the Department of Human
Resources, along with all the required documentation.

3. Required Documentation for Paid Parental Leave for Birth,
Adoption, Legal Guardianship: A birth certificate, adoption
certification, or a certified copy of the court order granting
legal guardianship, must be provided to the Department of
Human Resources within 30 days of the birth or placement,
unless extended by his or her appointing authority or
designee.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Benefit Policies

Page | 5

4. For Paid Parental Leave for a Pregnancy Loss: The employee's
medical provider must complete DOL Form WH-380-E
Certification of Health Care Provider for Employee's Serious
Health Condition. The employee must return the completed
DOL Form WH-380-E within 20 calendar days of requesting
the leave.
5. If the documentation provided by the employee is insufficient
or incomplete, the City will contact the employee in writing
to request additional information. The employee will have
seven (7) days to cure any deficiencies.

6. The authorized representative of the City may contact the
employee's health care provider for authentication and
clarification so long as the employee has first been offered the
opportunity to cure incomplete documentation.

B. Paid Leave under Paragraph C of Article V (Up to 20 hours of
intermittent leave).

1. In cases where the use of paid leave is foreseeable, the
employee must submit the Request for Medical Leave/Paid
Parental Leave Form (A-10-1), signed and dated in advance to
the appointing authority or designee.

2. In cases where use of paid leave is not foreseen, the employee
must submit the Paid Parental Leave Appointment Request
Form immediately upon the employee's return from leave.
Failure to timely comply and/or provide required documentation may result in
forfeiture of leave and the employee will be responsible for reimbursing the City of
Cleveland the value of benefits and/or monies received under this policy, and/or
may result in the employee being disciplined for absent-without-leave or absent
without leave resigned (Civil Service Rule 8.45).

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Benefit Policies

Page | 6

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Signature

Director of Human Resources

Title

August 17, 2023

Date