--- PAGE 1 ---
CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Benefits Policies

Page | 1

PAID SAFE LEAVE POLICY

I. Introduction

The City of Cleveland is committed to the health and safety of its workforce.
For these reasons, employees who are victims of domestic violence, sexual
assault, or stalking may be eligible to receive Paid Safe Leave. This benefit is
intended to help employees navigate the fallout of violence by granting them
time to, among other things, seek treatment and counseling, relocate, or
participate in legal proceedings. This leave is provided in addition to other
fringe benefits afforded employees.

II.  Eligible Employees

A. Any eligible regular full or part-time employee who is a victim, or is a
parent or legal guardian of a child victim, of "domestic violence," "sexual
assault," or "stalking," shall be entitled to take leave from work for any of
the following reasons:

1. Seeking medical attention related to physical or psychological
injuries caused by domestic violence, sexual assault, or stalking.

2. Obtaining services from a victim-services organization.

3. Obtaining psychological and/or other counseling.

4. Participating in safety planning, temporarily or permanently
relocating, or taking any other actions reasonably necessary to
increase the safety of the employee or employee's family or
household member from future domestic violence, sexual assault, or
stalking; or,

5. Seeking legal assistance or remedies to ensure the health and safety
of the employee, including preparing for or participating in any civil
or criminal legal proceeding related to or derived from domestic
violence, sexual assault, or stalking.

B. The terms "domestic violence," "sexual assault," and "stalking" are defined
by Ohio law and § 171.67 of the Municipal Code.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Benefits Policies

Page | 2

C. Exceptions.   The eligibility of City employees employed in a job
classification covered by a collective bargaining agreement is subject to the
terms of the City's collective bargaining agreement and the requirements of
Chapter 4117 of the Ohio Revised Code. This policy shall not replace, amend,
add to, or deprive any employee of any paid safe leave benefit to which he
or she may be entitled to under the terms of any collective bargaining
agreement between any union and the City approved by ordinance of
council.

III. Length of Paid Safe Leave

A. Eligible full-time employees are entitled to sixty (60) hours of Paid Safe
Leave annually.

B. Eligible part-time employees are entitled to thirty (30) hours of Paid Safe
Leave annually.

C. Paid Safe Leave may be taken intermittently or on a reduced work schedule.

D. Employees are not required to expend available, accrued benefit time,
including vacation, personal, compensatory, or sick leave, before using paid
safe leave time.

E. If no paid leave options are available, an appointing authority may grant a
leave of absence to the employee without pay.

F. Employees on Paid Safe Leave are ineligible to receive overtime pay, and no
portion of Paid Safe Leave shall be included in calculating an employee's
overtime pay.

G. Employees on Paid Safe Leave are ineligible to receive holiday pay. A
holiday occurring during the leave period shall be counted as one day of
Paid Safe leave and shall be paid as such.

H. Upon separation of the individual's employment, unused Paid Safe Leave is
forfeited; under no circumstances will this benefit be paid out.

IV. Procedures for Taking Paid Safe Leave

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Benefits Policies

Page | 3

A. To use Paid Safe Leave, an employee must submit a written request and at
least one form of acceptable documentation to the Employee Relations
Manager of the Department of Human Resources (DHR). The following
documentation is acceptable:

1. Documentation from an employee, agent, or volunteer of a victim-
services organization, the Employee Assistance Program (Ease-at-
Work), an attorney, a member of the clergy, or a medical or other
professional from whom the employee has sought assistance in
addressing domestic violence, sexual assault, or stalking, that
supports the employee's request and that the DHR determines
confirms that the employee is eligible for leave.

2. Police report or court record (e.g., temporary restraining order,
complaint, indictment, witness statement, etc.) establishing the
employee's eligibility for leave; or

3. Other corroborating evidence deemed sufficient by the DHR.

B. The DHR may require any additional documentation necessary to
substantiate the request or subsequent uses of leave.

V. Additional Information & Resources

To request leave or ask questions about this policy:

Employee Relations Manager
Department of Human Resources
601 Lakeside Avenue, Room 121 Cleveland, Ohio 44114
(216) 664-2493

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Benefits Policies

Page | 4

This policy has been issued under the authority of Matthew Cole, Director of
Human Resources:

Signature

Director of Human Resources
Title

September 16, 2024
Date