--- PAGE 1 ---
CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Benefit Policies

Page | 1

PREGNANT WORKERS FAIRNESS ACT (PWFA) POLICY

I. Pregnancy Workers Fairness Act, General Statement

A. This Policy is based on the Pregnant Workers Fairness Act (PWFA)
new law that requires covered employers to provide "reasonable
accommodations" to a worker's known limitations related to
pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions, unless the
accommodation will cause the employer an "undue hardship."

B. The PWFA applies only to accommodations. Existing laws that the
EEOC enforces make it illegal to fire or otherwise discriminate
against workers on the basis of pregnancy, childbirth, or related
medical conditions.

C. The PWFA does not replace federal, state, or local laws that are
more protective of workers affected by pregnancy, childbirth, or
related medical conditions.

D. Accordingly, the City of Cleveland will provide "reasonable
accommodations" to a qualified employee with a known limitation
related to pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions,
absent an "undue hardship."

E. An employee may request an accommodation to enable them to
perform the essential functions of their current position or to
accommodate a disability to enable the employee to enjoy the
benefits and privileges extended to   all employees.

II. Accommodations Review

A. If an employee is unable to perform the essential functions of their
position,   the employee may submit a Request for Accommodation
form to the appointing authority with supporting documentation.
(See form attached).

B. The Request for Accommodation form along with supporting medical
documentation will be reviewed by the Department of
Human Resources, Employee/Labor Relations.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Benefit Policies

Page | 2

C. When it has been determined that an employee is  qualified under
the PWFA, the Department of Human Resources will direct the
employee's department or division concerning the
accommodation to be provided.

D. Under the PWFA, an employee who cannot do one or more
essential functions of a job will also be considered qualified if:

1. Any inability to perform an essential function is for a
temporary period;

2. The essential function could be performed in the near
future; and

3. The inability to perform the essential function can be
reasonably accommodated.

4. Examples of Reasonable Accommodations:

• Flexible Breaks
• Changing food or drink policies
• Changing work locations or equipment
• Changing the dress code
• Flexible work station
• Telework
• Temporary Reassignment
• Leave for appointments with health care
professionals
• Light duty
• Leave to recover from childbirth

E. Under the PWFA, the City of Cleveland cannot do the
following:

1. Require an employee to accept an accommodation
without a discussion regarding the accommodation
between the employee and City;
2. Deny a position or other employment opportunities to a
qualified employee or applicant for employment based
on the person's need for a reasonable accommodation;

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Benefit Policies

Page | 3

3. Require an employee to take leave if another reasonable
accommodation can be provided that would permit an
employee to keep working;
4. Retaliate against an individual for reporting or opposing
unlawful discrimination under the PWFA or
participating in a PWFA proceeding (e.g. investigation);
or

5. Interfere with any individual's rights under the PWFA.

F. If the employee has a right under other laws such as FMLA,
there may be no need for a reasonable accommodation.

This policy has been issued under the authority of:

Signature
Director of Human Resources

Title

December 19, 2023 (Effective: June 27, 2023)

Date