--- PAGE 1 ---
CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies

Page | 1

SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY
Mission Statement
The City prohibits harassment based on an individual's sex or gender. The City of
Cleveland will respond promptly to complaints of sexual harassment. Where it is
determined that inappropriate behavior has occurred, the City of Cleveland will
act to eliminate the behavior and impose corrective action.

No one will be subject to, and the City of Cleveland prohibits, any form of reprisal,
intimidation, or retaliation for good faith reports, or complaints of incidents of
discrimination of any kind, pursuing any harassment claim, or cooperating in related
investigations.

Violations of this policy may result in discipline, up to and including termination of
employment.

I. Statement of Policy

A. Sexual harassment means any harassment based on someone's sex or
gender. It includes harassment that is not sexual in nature (for
example, offensive remarks about an individual's sex or gender), as well
as any unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and
other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature when any one of
the following criteria is met:

1. Submission to such conduct is made explicitly or implicitly a term
or condition of an individual's employment.

2. Submission to or rejection of such by an individual is used as the
basis for employment decisions

3. Such conduct has the purpose or the effect of unreasonably
interfering with an individual's work performance or creates an
intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment.  The terms
"intimidating," "hostile," and "offensive," are interpreted according
to legal standards generally from the viewpoint of a reasonable
person in similar circumstances and the complaining party.

B. The City of Cleveland will not tolerate sexual harassment, regardless of
form. This list is illustrative and not exhaustive:

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies

Page | 2

1. Verbal (e.g., epithets, derogatory statements, slurs, sexually
related comments or jokes, unwelcome sexual advances,
requests for sexual favors, obscene or suggestive comments, or
graphic comments about a person's body or sexual prowess.

2. Non-Verbal (e.g., texts, emails, displaying sexually suggestive
posters, cartoons, or drawings, sending adult-themed gifts,
suggestive gestures or looks, or leering, etc.).

3. Physical (e.g., touching, rubbing, grabbing, kissing, hugging,
poking, patting, pinching, etc.).

C. No one will be subject to, and the City of Cleveland prohibits, any form
of discipline, reprisal, intimidation, or retaliation for good faith
reporting of incidents of harassment of any kind, pursuing any
harassment claim, or cooperating in related investigation.

II. Complaint Process
If employees feel that they or someone else may have been subjected to conduct
that violates this policy, then they should report it immediately to a supervisor or
directly to the Department of Human Resources (DHR). Supervisors must
promptly notify the DHR of any reported, observed, or suspected sexual
harassment. Failure to promptly notify the DHR of any reported, observed, or
suspected sexual harassment may lead to disciplinary action, up to and including
termination. Any complaint of sexual harassment will be investigated by the DHR
as outlined by the Anti-Discrimination/Anti-Harassment Policy. All employees
are expected to fully comply with any investigation, and failure to do so is a
violation of City policy.

III. Confidentiality

All complaints and investigations are treated confidentially to the extent possible
and information is disclosed strictly on a need-to-know basis, but confidentiality
cannot be guaranteed. The identity of the complainant often is revealed to the
parties involved during the investigation, e.g. witnesses, alleged harasser, Union
representative, etc.

IV. Additional Information & Resources

To report violations or ask questions about this policy:

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Workplace Policies

Page | 3

Employee Relations Manager
Department of Human Resources
City Hall- 601 Lakeside Avenue, Room 121 Cleveland, Ohio 44114
(216) 664-2493

This policy has been issued under the authority of Matthew Cole, Director of
Human Resources:

__________________________________
Signature

Director of Human Resources
Title

 March 25, 2024
Date