--- PAGE 1 ---
CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Benefit Policies

Page | 1

VACATION LEAVE POLICY
I. Vacation Leave
A. All regular full-time City officers or employees, including
hourly employees with thirty (30) days of continuous service
with the  City, are entitled to ten (10) days (two weeks) of
vacation leave with full pay.
1

B. Thereafter, such City officers and employees are entitled to
the following vacation leave with full pay for each year
based upon their total vacation leave service credit as of
December 31st of the  preceding year, as follows:
Effective as of January 1, 2023:

Continuous Years of Service                               Vacation          Benefit
1 to 5      10 days (2 weeks)
After 8 years     15 days (3 weeks)
After 12 years     20 days (4 weeks)
After 22 Years    25 days (5 weeks)
Effective as of January 1, 2024:

Continuous Years of Service                     Vacation          Benefit
1 to 5      10 days (2 weeks)
After 5 years     15 days (3 weeks)
2

After 12 years     20 days (4 weeks)
After 22 Years    25 days (5 weeks)

C. Vacation begins to accrue when an employee is hired and
continues  to accrue until December 31st of each year if the
employee remains in paid status. An employee who is on leave
of absence without pay for more than thirty (30) calendar days
in any calendar year, or who begins employment during the

1
 Employees who gave notice of separation from City Services as of October 25, 2023, are not
eligible.
2
 Provided, however, that a City officer or employee who has less than eight (8) years of
continuous
service with the City and who has given notice of separation from City services on or before
December 31, 2023, shall be entitled to 10 days (2 weeks) of vacation leave.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Benefit Policies

Page | 2

year will earn vacation for that year at the  rate for which he or
she is eligible based on length of service as follows:

1. Zero (0) to  five (5) years of service -  one (1) day
per month, not  to exceed ten (10) days.

2. Five (5) to  twelve (12) years of service - one and one-half (1
1/2) days per month, not to exceed fifteen (15) days.

3. Twelve (12) to twenty-two (22) years of service - two (2) days per
month, not to exceed twenty (20) days.

4. More than twenty-two (22) years of service - two and one-half
(21/2) days per month, not to exceed twenty-five days.
D. Former Elected City Officials. A former elected official of the City of
Cleveland, who becomes a full-time officer or employee, including
a full-time hourly rate employee, will be credited with the time
served in such elected office for the purpose of determining such
officer's or employee's vacation time under Paragraphs (A) and (B)
above.

E. Exceptions. The provisions of Paragraphs (A) and (B) above shall not
apply to hourly rate craft employees paid based on building trades
and prevailing wages. This policy shall not replace, amend, add to,
or deprive any employee of any vacation rights to which he or she
may be entitled to under the terms of any collective bargaining
agreement between any union and the City approved by ordinance
of Council.

II. Discretionary Vacation Leave for Unclassified Employees

The Mayor and the Clerk of Council, as appropriate, may in his/her
discretion grant any person in the unclassified service of the City
additional week(s) of vacation leave with full pay when he/she
deems it necessary to successfully recruit or retain persons who
possess the experience, training, or other relevant
qualifications for
any such positions.  Unused discretionary vacation leave balances
automatically carry over to the following year.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Benefit Policies

Page | 3

III. Vacation Requests

A. All foreseeable vacation requests must be approved in advance. The
appointing authority may require employees to request vacation at
the beginning of the calendar year and may deny vacation requests
due to operational needs. Absence without prior approval will be
deemed absence without leave.

B. Use of vacation is subject to internal departmental rules and to
collective bargaining agreements.

IV. Vacation Time Carryover

Unused vacation balances automatically carry over to the following
year.

V. Payment for Unused Vacation

A. Employees who terminate their employment, retire, or are laid off
will receive payment for unused and prorated vacation leave. This
amount will be paid by voucher. These vouchers must be submitted
to the Department of Human Resources for approval with a copy of
the "Application for Sick Leave Conversion, Unused Vacation,
Overtime and/or Compensatory Time" form signed by the
appointing authority.

B. Eligible non-union employees may be granted the option to
convert a maximum of 160-hours of their vacation balance during a
designated period in April/May of an approved year if approved by
the Finance Department. Employees are required to have a
vacation balance of 120- hours after the conversion takes place.
One time per calendar year, all non-union employees electing the
conversion will be required to indicate the number of hours they
desire to convert which cannot exceed 160-hours. The non-union
employee must sign, date, and submit their request to the
Department of Finance, Division of Accounts by the deadline set by
the Department of Finance. Conversions will be paid out (as regular
compensation) based on the non-union employee's hourly rate at
the time the letter was sent. This payment will be subject to the
usual taxes and withholding. Final approval is subject to the
Director of Finance or Human Resources and is irrevocable.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Benefit Policies

Page | 4

Note:  The conversion  payment is a non-pensionable  payment.
VI. Effect of Prior Service

A. Employees who have earned service credit from a previous public
employer in Ohio will be credited with that prior service for vacaƟon
accrual up to the
designated limit. Not all employees are eligible to earn
prior service credit. The following are excluded from prior service
credit:

1. ReƟrees from any government employer in the State of Ohio.
2. Federal or military service time.
3. Any Ɵme for service while classified as a student.
4. Any part-Ɵme employment.
5. Any time during which the employee was on extended unpaid leave
except military leave.
Individuals may request transfer of service credit by completing an
authorization form available from Departmental Human Resources
personnel.

B. In most cases, a transfer from one department of the City to another
department does not affect an employee's vacation accrual. The
employee transfers with the employee's vacation balance.

VII. No provision of this policy is intended to replace, amend, add to, or deprive
any employee of any vacation rights to which he or she may be entitled to
under the terms of any collective bargaining agreement between any union
and the City approved by ordinance of Council.

CITY OF CLEVELAND
Human Resources Policies and Procedures
Benefit Policies

Page | 5

This policy has been issued under the authority of the Board of Control
Resolution No. **** -
23, adopted: - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Signature
Director of Human Resources

Title

November 15, 2023

Date